[1]
Cullen, J.
: This was an application pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, seeking an order in the nature of Certiorari quashing the decision of S.K. Yeandle, Immigration Officer, finding insufficient humanitarian and compassionate ("h and c") grounds to accept the applicant's application for permanent residence, and if granted, a follow up order requiring the respondent to grant another interview. The final relief sought was an injunction prohibiting the respondent from making any absolute or conditional order at the applicant's "credible basis" inquiry scheduled to be continued February 4, 1991.
[2]
On September 5, 1990, Ms. Yeandle conducted an interview of the applicant to determine whether "h and c" consideration warranted a recommendation of or exemption of the applicant from the normal visa requirements of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 as amended.
[3]
Parliament has determined, that with some exceptions, every immigrant and visitor
shall
make an application for a visa
before
he appears at a port of entry. However, s. 114(1)(d) permits the Governor in Council to make
Regulations
designating classes of persons who may be granted admission to Canada on the basis that their admission accords with "the humanitarian tradition of Canada with respect to the displaced and persecuted." Whether such persons should be admitted to Canada is determined pursuant to
Regulations
established under the authority of s. 114(1)(e).
[4]
Pursuant to s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
"The Governor in Council may by regulation exempt any person from any regulation made under subsection (1) or otherwise facilitate the admission of any person where the Governor in Council is satisfied that the person should be exempted from that regulation or the person's admission should be facilitated for reasons of public policy or due to the existence of compassionate or humanitarian considerations."
[5]
Also,
Regulations
entitled
Refugee Claimants Designated Class Regulations
were brought into force. Section 3(1) of those
Regulations
specify that they are only applicable to persons who have, among other things
"(b) signified, before January 1, 1989, an intention to make a claim to be a Convention refugee
(i) to an Immigration officer, who recorded that intention before that date, or to a person acting on behalf of an Immigration officer, who an Immigration officer is satisfied recorded that intention before that date, or
(ii) to an adjudicator prior to the conclusion of an inquiry respecting [that person's] status in Canada."
[6]
Backlog Regulations
permit the consideration of specified classes of persons to apply for exemption from the requirement that landing in Canada be applied from outside the country. The basis for such an exemption is that "in the view of the Minister's representative, there exist
humanitarian and compassionate grounds
to warrant such an exemption." (emphasis added).
[7]
Should the Minister's representative decide
not
to recommend special dispensation under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
to a refugee claimant who is in the backlog program, the claimant is entitled to proceed with his or her claim to status as a Convention Refugee, or otherwise follow the normal admission procedures of the
Immigration Act
.
[8]
It is not my role to proceed in the nature of an appeal, and I am not entitled to disagree with the reasoning of Ms. Sarah Yeandle (Yeandle), the Immigration Officer who conducted the applicant's hearing. The hearing officer has authority to exercise her discretion, and if it "has been exercised bona fide, uninfluenced by irrelevant considerations and not arbitrarily or illegally, no court is entitled to interfere even if the court, had the discretion been theirs, might have exercised it otherwise".
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at page 876.
[9]
Counsel for the respondent highlighted a recent case - unreported - where the court in exercising its process of judicial review over visa officers, directs, "the real question at issue is whether the procedure followed in the case violated the duty of fairness".
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  examination of the affidavits of the applicant and Yeandle, and the presentation by counsel for both parties forms the basis for the material set forth here. The applicant sought to be admitted to Canada on two occasions previously, once with her brother in Canada as a sponsor, and her own application for admission as a landed immigrant and neither was successful. The applicant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, and after the two unsuccessful earlier applications she entered Canada as a visitor on the 18th of November 1988 with a visitor's visa valid until 18 February 1989. On December 1, 1988 she made a claim to be a Convention Refugee. On 16th March 1989 she was granted a further extension of her visitor's visa until 16 September 1989, but remained in Canada after that date to the present time. As she was residing in Canada on January 1, 1989, and had indicated her intention to make a claim to be a Convention Refugee prior to that date, the applicant became subject to the Refugee Backlog Clearance Program ("the Refugee Backlog"). She received a notice of and attended an initial H and C interview on September 5, 1990. This interview was conducted by Yeandle, and the applicant was not represented by counsel although she was so entitled. The applicant produced various letters and documents in support of her claim for an exemption. These documents were perused by Yeandle to determine "which were relevant to the applicant's claim for humanitarian and compassionate consideration in arriving at my decision regarding the applicant" (Yeandle affidavit para. 7). Yeandle makes the point that she asked "for a complete description of the applicant's personal history", including some tombstone information and then, (Yeandle affidavit para. 8) "
We discussed in depth the reasons for the applicant's departure from this country (i.e. Trinidad and Tobago) and her status were she to return to Trinidad and Tobago
". (Emphasis mine). Yeandle assisted the applicant to complete the information form and the interview form. Yeandle makes the point in paragraph 9 of her affidavit, "during this process (i.e. assisting with forms), and in addition to this process throughout the interview, I obtained information from the applicant
further to
her documentary submissions describing her family relationships in Canada and in her country of origin and the economic situation she would be facing if she returned to her country of origin". Yeandle also advised the applicant (Yeandle affidavit para. 10) "that the onus was on her to inform me of and demonstrate any special humanitarian and compassionate consideration pertaining to her current situation which might warrant a recommendation that she be exempted from normal visa requirements under the
Immigration Act
". Yeandle also asked why she didn't want to leave Canada, and two reasons were given namely she wanted to assist her brother's family in Canada in caring for their autistic son, and that she would face a bleak economic future if she returned to Trinidad and Tobago. The applicant was then asked if she wished to add anything further, following which Yeandle states, "I considered all information, written and verbal, the applicant has supplied and made my decision accordingly".
[11]
The applicant, for her part does not disagree with Yeandle's description of the interview, and in fact concurs
(1) Ms. Yeandle assisted me in filling out an information form;
(2) Ms. Yeandle asked my reason for coming to Canada, how I got here, and if I stopped off anywhere on my way to Canada;
(3) Ms. Yeandle asked me if there was anything I would like to say with respect to why I should be allowed to stay in Canada;
(4) I responded that I would like to stay in Canada to help my brother and his family, in particular, my autistic nephew; that I was not happy in Trinidad because I was always supported by someone and there was no future for me; and that there was so much I could do in Canada to become independent. In addition, I explained that I was also doing volunteer work at Etobicoke General Hospital.
[12]
The applicant states she was unaware of the Employment and Immigration policy with respect to family dependence situations, and specifically Chapter 1E9 of the
Immigration Manual
, Section 9.07(3)(a) and (b). Attached as Exhibit M to the applicant's affadavit, they were issued in March 1990.
[13]
The applicant felt the following questions should have been asked by Yeandle and were not:
(a) my relationship with my brother and his family in Canada, both prior and since arriving in Canada;
(b) the degree of my dependency on my brother and his family, psychologically, financially, and emotionally;
(c) the degree of dependency of my brother and his family on me, psychologically and emotionally;
(d) the type of care I provide for my nephew;
(e) the amount of care I provide to my nephew;
(f) the ability of remaining family members in Trinidad to support me.
[14]
Also, the applicant states that the interview lasted approximately 20 or 30 minutes, which is challenged by Yeandle stating, "based on my past experience I truly believe that just the time taken to fill out forms alone would have been approximately 20 minutes for the information form and at least 20 minutes for the H and C interview form. In addition I spent several minutes perusing the documentary submissions supplied by the applicant and, further, spent more time informing the applicant of refugee backlog procedures and H and C interview criteria, as well as hearing supplemental verbal information from her. I regret that I am unable to recall the duration of the interview in more detail, due to the very large volume of such interviews I have conducted".
Conclusions
[15]
I am satisfied after listening to the representations of counsel for the applicant and the respondent, and after reading all the documentation, that Yeandle acted fairly in considering the humanitarian and compassionate claim of the applicant. Here is a person, who twice sought entry to Canada and was refused and who had a supportive brother in Canada, given not one but two more opportunities to make a claim to stay in Canada - the claim for refugee status and the backlog programme. She was not unfamiliar with her rights and filed a claim for Convention refugee status within two weeks of landing here as a visitor. She was also aware of the "refugee backlog" program and attended the hearing above referred to. With all of this, and surely knowing of the importance of the September 5, 1990, meeting she opted to handle it herself, even though she was entitled to counsel. No one told her she couldn't be represented, and if she had any doubts that could be dispelled by a phone call to the Immigration Office. Failure on the applicant to retain counsel is clearly
not
the fault of Yeandle.
[16]
Both the applicant's and Yandle's evidence is that the applicant was "helped" by Yeandle to sort out the documents that were pertinent to the application, and helped to fill out and make copies of forms. Through her questioning of the applicant and her discussions with the applicant I am satisfied Yeandle had all the information she needed to make her decision. Certainly Yeandle was familiar with the Manual some six months after it came out, and knew her responsibilities. I expect anyone could make up a list of "other" questions that might have been asked by Yeandle, but its clear from the affidavits of the applicant and Yeandle, that she had sufficient information to make a decision "in good faith and taking into account no irrelevant consideration" (Para. 14 Yeandle).
[17]
Yeandle also followed a courteous, and courageous course in immediately notifying the applicant of her decision and followed this up with a written decision. Oral reasons were given by Yeandle at the time she appraised the applicant of her decision. The applicant was asked to respond but had nothing further to say to support her H and C application.
[18]
Counsel suggests that the written decision refers to organizations, in the plural so Yeandle was unaware that one agency only assisted the brother's family. First, all information of this nature had to come from the applicant, and she may not have known that the various services provided all emanated from one agency. Discussion with the applicant and not direct questions to her also could yield the information in the reasons.
[19]
This Immigration Officer Yeandle has a duty to act fairly, and the evidence convinces me she has done so, when exercising the discretion given to her by Parliament.
[20]
This application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/gas
[End of document]