[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an appeal, by way of motion, by the appellants (plaintiffs) Iscar Limited and Iscar Tools Inc. (Iscar) from an order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated February 24, 1986 and by way of application de novo for an order
1) Granting judgment by default against the defendants Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG for failing to file a defence or
2) declaring that the within action was properly commenced and served upon the said defendants pursuant to Federal Court Rules 309 and/or 310(2) or
3) pursuant to Federal Court Rule 307, permitting service of the statement of claim on the said defendants.
[2]
On February 5, 1986, "Iscar" presented a notice of motion wherein "Iscar" asked the Federal Court of Canada for an order whereby "Iscar" would be granted judgment by default or, in the alternative, declaring that the action was properly commenced, or, in the alternative, permitting service of the statement of claim under Federal Court Rule 307.
[3]
In effect, the appellants are asking, by way of an application de novo for the same conclusions as were requested of the Associate Senior Prothonotary and this, while I am sitting in appeal from the judgment of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated February 24, 1986.
[4]
At the commencement of the hearing, the attorney for the respondents objected to the appeal giving the following reasons:
1) The appellants in their notice of motion of February 5, 1986 sought the same relief as they are seeking today
2) The appellants are presently appealing the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary and, at the same time, in the same document, are making an application de novo
3) The notice of appeal is defective as the appellants simply filed a notice of appeal without making it presentable for hearing.
[5]
In reply to the arguments presented by the respondents, the attorney for "Iscar" states that his notice of appeal was properly filed in virtue of Rule 336(5) which states:
"336(5) Any person affected by an order or decision of a prothonotary, other than a judgment under Rules 432 to 437, may appeal therefrom to the Court and such appeal shall be made by an application of which a notice shall be given to all interested parties setting forth the grounds of objection and served within 14 days after the order or decision complained of, and 4 clear days before the day fixed for hearing the same, or served within such other time as may be allowed by the Court or a prothonotary on ex parte application. The appeal shall be filed not later than 2 days before the date named for hearing. (In this paragraph, 'Court' means 'Trial Division', if the matter is in the Trial Division, and 'Court of Appeal', if the matter is in the Court of Appeal.)"
[6]
The appellants argue that they gave notice of appeal to all of the interested parties by serving the notice of appeal on the respondents (defendants) on March 6, 1986. The notice of appeal was filed into the Office of the Registry on the same date. The notice of appeal contains all of the reasons for the appeal.
[7]
The notice of appeal was served on the respondents within 14 days of the decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary.
[8]
Although Rule 336(5) clearly speaks of "day fixed for hearing the same" or "before the date named for hearing", I am of the view that the appeal was properly filed notwithstanding that no notice for hearing was served with the notice of appeal.
[9]
The respondents suffered no prejudice. If respondents were of the belief that the notice of appeal was defective, it was for respondents to have presented a motion to reject the appeal.
[10]
The Rules of the Federal Court give me large discretionary powers concerning delays. This is to enable me to ensure that justice is given to all persons and that technicalities should not govern the procedural aspects of a case.
[11]
For this reason, I reject the objection of the respondents that the appeal, as filed, is illegal.
[12]
The appellants are attempting, in their notice of motion, to both appeal the Associate Senior Prothonotary's decision and make a new application. The reason for the new application is to enable the appellants to present new evidence while, at the same time, appealing the decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary.
[13]
The attorney for respondents objected stating that the appeal can only proceed on the evidence presented to the Associate Senior Prothonotary. That if appellants wished to present a new motion, they can do so but by means of a separate and distinct motion.
[14]
The decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary specifically allows the appellants (plaintiffs) the right to present a new motion. The Associate Senior Prothonotary states:
"And It Is Further ordered that the Plaintiffs' motion be dismissed without prejudice to the right of the Plaintiffs to bring a further motion for service ex juris on further and better evidence."
[15]
I requested of the appellants attorney the Rule that enables an appellant to make a motion de novo within an appeal and was informed that he was of the view that no such rule exists but that it was allowed, as in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  believe it is necessary to refer to the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by the Associate Chief Justice. Mr. Justice Collier states:
"On a bare reading of the Allesbrook affidavit, it can be said, on an ex parte application, that a reasonable arguable case of infringement, or the commission of a tort, in Canada, had been made out." (Page 429)
[17]
At page 430, Mr. Justice Collier goes on to state:
"When the affidavit of Allesbrook is considered in the light of the cross-examination, because of its vague hearsay, and hearsay on hearsay, it has, in my view, little probative value in making out an arguable case ..."
[18]
As a result of the above reasoning, Mr. Justice Collier set aside the order of the Associate Chief Justice but states at page 431:
"This order is without prejudice to the right of the plaintiffs, if they see fit, to bring another application based upon additional or better material."
[19]
Plaintiffs did bring another application and presented the new application to the Associate Senior Prothonotary.
[20]
Mr. Justice Cullen was sitting in appeal of the decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary as a result of the decision on the second application.
[21]
This is very different from the present case. The appellants could make a new application for an ex juris service but they must do so in a new application as ordered by the Associate Senior Prothonotary in the decision presently being appealed.
[22]
They have chosen not to do so. They have chosen to make an application de novo within their notice of appeal.
[23]
I have therefore concluded that the appellants in arguing their case before me could not present new evidence.
[24]
Appellants argue that the Associate Senior Prothonotary in rendering his decision failed to consider the affidavit of Morrissey nor did he take notice of the cross-examination of Turnell.
[25]
According to the attorney representing appellants, the Associate Senior Prothonotary failed to admit the evidence contained in the Morrissey affidavit as he failed to admit the evidence contained in Turnell's cross-examination.
[26]
Upon reading the Order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary, page 2, he states:
"And Upon Reading the affidavits of John Morrissey and Terry Turnell, filed, and the transcripts of the cross-examination of each of them ..."
[27]
It would seem that the Associate Senior Prothonotary did read the documents mentioned. What one cannot determine is how much consideration he gave to each of these documents.
[28]
I believe appellants' attorney when he informed me that the Associate Senior Prothonotary stated he would not consider the evidence in the affidavits or in the cross-examination.
[29]
In a motion for service ex juris under Rule 307, or for service upon an agent or representative of a defendant under Rule 310 all evidence related to the question should be admitted and considered.
[30]
As Mr. Justice Cullen stated in the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the jurisdiction can be supported by affidavit or other evidence."
[31]
The evidence that is to be produced under Rule 307 or Rule 310 is made by affidavit and, as in this case, the evidence obtained in a cross-examination of a person making an affidavit filed as proof.
[32]
The attorney for appellants states positively that the Associate Senior Prothonotary stated he did not take the evidence of Morrissey's affidavit nor the cross-examination of Turnell into account. The attorney for respondents states he has no recollection either way.
[33]
I therefore consider the positive statement of appellants correct and conclude that the Associate Senior Prothonotary failed to consider the evidence of Morrissey contained in his affidavit nor the evidence obtained in the cross-examination of Turnell.
[34]
The Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in not considering this evidence.
[35]
The issue to be determined is whether there was sufficient evidence presented to the Associate Senior Prothonotary to have enabled him to grant judgment by default against the defendants Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG or in the alternative, declaring that the action was properly commenced and served upon these defendants pursuant to Rules 309 and/or 310 (2) or in the further alternative, pursuant to Federal Court Rule 307, permitting service of the statement of claim on the said defendants ex juris.
[36]
Appellants' attorney did not argue before me that he really believes that I should allow his appeal and grant a judgment by default against Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG. I do not believe that I have any evidence before me that would allow me to do so.
[37]
If I allow this appeal and state that the service in Canada under Rule 309 or 310(2) is valid then the two German defendants must be accorded a delay to file a plea. If I only allow ex juris service, then the service must be effected in the manner prescribed by the law.
[38]
I am not prepared to grant a default judgment against the German defendants.
1.
Can service be effected upon the defendants at the office of Hertel Carbide Canada Inc. in virtue of Rule 309 or 310(2)?
[39]
The appellants are claiming that they can effect service at the office of Hertel Carbide Canada Inc. in virtue of Rule 309(2)(b)(ii) which states:
"309(2) Personal service of a document upon a corporation is effected by leaving a certified copy of the document
(b) in any case other than a municipal corporation,
(ii) with the person apparently in charge, at the time of the service, of the head office or of the branch or agency in Canada where the service is effected, or
or by such other method as may be provided by statute for the particular case or as is provided for service of a document on a corporation for the purposes of a superior court in the province where the service is being effected."
[40]
The words of importance to be found in this Rule are "with the person apparently in charge, at the time of the service, ..., of the branch or agency in Canada where the service is effected".
[41]
I do not consider the last paragraph of 309(2) as pertinent. I was not cited any statute, provincial or federal, that would allow the service presently requested on Hertel Carbide. No evidence was made that Hertel Carbide is a partner with the defendants Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG.
[42]
It remains to be found, from the evidence presented to the Associate Senior Prothonotary, if Hertel Carbide is a branch of or agency of the German defendants in Canada.
[43]
The evidence submitted with the motion to the Associate Senior Prothonotary concerning the question of whether or not Hertel Carbide Canada Inc. is a branch or agency of the German Hertel Companies can be found in the affidavit of Turnell dated February 18, 1986, Turnell's cross-examination on February 21, 1986 and the affidavit of John R. Morrissey.
[44]
After digesting the evidence made in these documents, I am satisfied that the defendant Hertel Carbide Canada Inc. is not a branch of nor agency of the German defendants.
[45]
Nothing in the evidence of Morrissey could lead me to believe that Hertel Carbide Canada Inc. is an agent or branch office of the German defendants.
[46]
Paragraph 2 of the affidavit of Morrissey simply states that on information obtained from his instructing solicitors he believes that the facts set out in the statement of claim are true. In examining the statement of claim there is no indication of agency or branch office. There is a discussion of the alleged illegal acts but no allegation that the Canadian defendant is a branch of or an agent of the German companies.
[47]
The affidavit of Turnell is positive as to this issue. Turnell states in paragraph 2 that Hertel Carbide "has never been and is not now a subsidiary of the German companies".
[48]
In the cross-examination, Turnell states that the Canadian company imports into Canada and sells, in Canada, merchandise manufactured by the German defendants but that the merchandise purchased is part of a whole range of merchandise manufactured by the German companies.
[49]
In an attempt to convince me that Hertel Canada is a branch or agent, the appellants' attorney gives as an example the following:
(a) The German companies send technical support staff to Canada to hold seminars
(b) The expense of the staff is shared when an employee of the German companies may come to Canada for technical reasons regarding the equipment being sold in Canada
(c) Turnell went to Germany as a visitor to trade shows
(d) Literature distributed by the Canadian company is produced by the German companies
(e) Similar catalogues in German for Germany and in English for English speaking companies
(f) Turnell signed an affidavit on behalf of the German defendants for an application for conditional appearance which shows a relationship
(g) Turnell signed an affidavit in the federal trade-marks office for the benefit of the German defendants
(h) That the possibility exists that sales figures of Hertel Carbide may be reported to the German defendants
[50]
I do not agree with the attorney for appellants. The above evidence does not lead me to conclude that the Canadian defendant is a branch of or agent of the German companies. All of the above is usual when a company is an exclusive distributor for a foreign company. It does not make the exclusive distributor an agent or branch office of its supplier.
[51]
Turnell's cross-examination contradicts all of appellants' arguments on this subject. Turnell explains that the Canadian company purchases a part of the merchandise of the German companies, pays for same within 30 days and uses the expertise of the German companies when a problem may arise.
[52]
From the evidence of Turnell, found in his cross-examination, I believe that the Canadian defendant is an independant Canadian corporation that sells a product manufactured by the German defendants. In a reply to a question, in the cross-examination, (question 23) Turnell states that the Canadian defendant only buys from the German company. It, the Canadian company is an exclusive distributor. Hertel Carbide purchases like any other customer. It (question 29) places orders, the merchandise is shipped F.O.B. with payment due in 30 days (question 99).
[53]
No evidence has been made that Rule 310(2) can be applied. I am satisfied that there is no proof that the German defendants enter into contracts in Canada or enter into business transactions in Canada where services of a person or persons resident in Canada are used to represent them.
[54]
The proof of Turnell is that all orders are placed in Germany and are shipped F.O.B. Germany (question 79), that the catalogues used are purchased in Germany and are then shipped to Canada (question 107), that the Canadian company is only a distributor in Canada for the German company and has never been a representative of the German defendants (questions 139 and 156).
[55]
I therefore conclude that the Associate Senior Prothonotary was correct in allowing the defendants Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG to file a conditional appearance as the service effected of the statement of claim was not valid.
2.
Should service ex juris under Rule 307 be allowed
[56]
I believe the Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in not allowing service ex juris upon the two German defendants. Had the Associate Senior Prothonotary considered and accepted as evidence the affidavit of Morrissey and the cross-examination of Turnell, I believe he would have allowed ex juris service under Rule 307. Rule 307 states:
"307(1) When a defendant, whether a Canadian citizen, British subject or a foreigner, is out of the jurisdiction of the Court and whether in Her Majesty's dominions or in a foreign country, the Court, upon application, supported by affidavit or other evidence showing that, in the belief of the deponent, the plaintiff has a good cause of action, and showing in what place or country, such defendant is or probably may be found, may order (Form 5) that a notice of the statement of claim or declaration may be served on the defendant in such place or country or within such limits as the Court thinks fit to direct. (Form 6).
"(2) An order under paragraph (1) shall fix a time, depending on the place of service, within which the defendant is to file his defence or obtain from the Court further time to do so.
"(3) If any problem arises concerning service of an originating document in a matter other than an action, an application may be made to the Court for directions.
"(4) An application for an order under this rule may be made ex parte."
[57]
I am in agreement with the attorney for appellants when he states that the purpose of the Rules of this Court are to facilitate rather than hinder the advancement of cases. If a claimant feels it has been wronged, the claimant should be allowed to bring an action in the Courts to seek redress.
[58]
Rule 2(2) enunciates this point when it states:
"2(2) These Rules are intended to render effective the substantive law and to ensure that it is carried out; and they are to be so interpreted and applied as to facilitate rather than to delay or to end prematurely the normal advancement of cases."
[59]
In order to allow the appellants the right to "advance" their case the two German defendants must be party to the action.
[60]
Exhibit "A" to Morrissey's affidavit is a copy of the statement of claim for which Morrissey "verily believe that the facts set out in the aforesaid statement of claim are true".
[61]
What are the relevant facts set out? To satisfy the requirements of Rule 307, the appellants must first show that the defendants are out of the jurisdiction of the Court and, as in this case, in a foreign country.
[62]
Paragraph 3 of the statement of claim indicates that Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG are German companies and subsist under the laws of Germany. The statement of defence of Hertel Carbide, in paragraph 5, admits that the two German companies "are legal entities organized and subsisting under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany, and have an established place in that country".
[63]
It remains to be seen whether there is any evidence showing a good cause of action.
[64]
The statement of claim, Exhibit "A", in paragraphs 6 & 7 states that Iscar Israel is the owner of a copyright identified in Schedule A and it subsists in Canada.
[65]
In paragraph 13 of the claim, plaintiffs allege that the "Hertel brand tools are, directly or indirectly, and to the knowledge of the defendants and each of them, three dimensional reproductions of substantial parts of the drawings of Iscar Israel ...".
[66]
I believe that this shows a "good cause of action" to allow an ex juris service.
[67]
In addition to Morrissey's affidavit and exhibits, Turnell, in his cross-examination and affidavit, admits using, in Canada, catalogues printed for Hertel Carbide by the German defendants. The catalogues are alleged to contain reproductions or substantial reproductions of Iscar Israel drawings.
[68]
The words used by Turnell in his affidavit are "... and has from time to time used some brochures supplied by Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG for convenience".
[69]
In order for the appellants to obtain permission to serve ex juris they should not be forced to prove their case. They only must show "a good arguable position". They have done so and I thus allow the ex juris service.
[70]
Accordingly, I maintain the appeal in part and allow the appellants to serve, pursuant to Federal Court Rule 307, the statement of claim on the defendants, Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG ex juris.
[71]
The defendants Karl Hertel GmbH and Karl Hertel GmbH Verkaufs KG are hereby ordered to appear and file a defence to the statement of claim within a period of 30 days of service unless the defendants obtain, from this Court, further time to do so.
[72]
The whole with costs to follow suit.
Appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/kawm
[End of document]