 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 183)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Noël, J.
February 13, 2015.
Counsel:
Craig Costantino, for the applicant;
Alison Brown, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Elgin, Cannon & Associates, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Noël, J.
: This is an application for leave to commence an application for judicial review pursuant to section 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA] of a decision of Senior Immigration Officer D. Takhar [the PRRA Officer] of Citizenship and Immigration Canada, dated May 26, 2014, which rejected the Pre-Removal Risk Assessment [PRRA application] of Gilberto Micolta, the Applicant.
II.
Facts
[2]
The Applicant is a citizen of Colombia. He made his way to Seattle in the United States as a stowaway in May 2009.
[3]
He entered Canada on July 4, 2009, and made a refugee claim on July 6, 2009, which was denied on November 8, 2012, by the Refugee Protection Division [RPD]. The Applicant's application for leave and judicial review of the RPD decision was denied on March 5, 2013.
[4]
A deferral of removal order was granted and the Applicant made a PRRA application in January 2014, which was refused in May 2014. This is the decision under review.
III.
Contested Decision
[5]
The PRRA Officer states that the alleged risk submitted by the Applicant is materially the same as was presented to the RPD, namely that the Applicant faces a personalized risk of being killed by members of the
Fuerzas Revolucionarias de Colombia
[the FARC] if he is to return to Colombia and that there is no recourse to state protection for someone in the Applicant's position.
[6]
The PRRA Officer evaluates the events the Applicant noted in his affidavit as having taken place since April 2013 along with letters submitted in support of his PRRA application and finds that his submissions are insufficient to connect the killing of Juan, the Applicant's nephew, to the Applicant's fear of the FARC. The PRRA Officer also evaluates newspaper articles submitted by Applicant. Again, the killings listed in those articles do not make any mention of the aggressors being members of the FARC. There is also insufficient evidence to overcome the RPD's finding of state protection in Colombia.
[7]
The PRRA Officer further finds that the three letters submitted in relation to the Applicant's mental health are simply a continuation of the facts presented to the RPD. The letters therefore do not meet the new evidence criteria of subsection 113(a) of IRPA.
[8]
The PRRA Officer concludes that the Applicant, if returned to Colombia, faces no more than a mere possibility of persecution as described in section 96 of IRPA and that the Applicant would not likely be at risk of torture or likely to face a risk to his life or cruel and unusual treatment or punishment pursuant to section 97 of IRPA.
IV.
Parties' Submissions
[9]
The Applicant submits that the PRRA Officer made a veiled credibility finding and should have held a hearing as the PRRA Officer had doubts as to the evidence presented by the Applicant. The PRRA Officer also erred in failing to address the allegations made before the RPD in light of the new evidence or to interpret the new evidence in light of the Applicant's history. The Respondent retorts by arguing that no oral hearing was required because the Applicant's evidence is not enough to overcome the RPD findings.
[10]
The Applicant further argues that the PRRA Officer erred in excluding the medical letters based on the test set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. The Respondent, on the other hand, states that the PRRA Officer assessed the Applicant's mental health along with his vulnerability as an Afro-Colombian and properly concluded that both had been considered by the RPD. The recent evidence provided did not describe any material change to the Applicant's condition.
[11]
Finally, the Applicant submits that the PRRA Officer's conclusion that the Applicant had not rebutted the findings of the RPD that he lacked subjective fear or rebutted the presumption of state protection is unreasonable since he presented new evidence regarding the murder of people close to him and the disappearance of his son. The Respondent argues, for his part, that the Applicant never sought state protection in Colombia.
V.
Issues
[12]
I have reviewed the parties' record and respective submissions and state the issues as follow:
• Did the PRRA Officer err in not holding an oral hearing?
• Did the PRRA Officer err in denying the PRRA application?
VI.
Standard of Review
[13]
The standard of review to be applied to the question of whether or not a hearing ought to have taken place is a question of procedural fairness and should be reviewed on the correctness standard (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The question as to whether or not the PRRA decision is reasonable is a question of mixed fact and law and should be reviewed on the reasonableness standard. The Court shall only intervene if it concludes that the decision is unreasonable, and falls outside the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] SCJ No 9 at para 47).
VII.
Analysis
A.
Did the PRRA Officer err in not holding an oral hearing?
[14]
The Applicant first submits that the PRRA Officer should have held an oral hearing and that the PRRA Officer made a veiled credibility finding. Paragraph 113(b) of IRPA clearly establishes that an oral hearing is to be held only in exceptional circumstances. The relevant factors to be considered are found in section 167 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
(SOR/2002-227) [the Regulations]. The factors set out in section 167 of the Regulations are:
a) Whether there is evidence that raises a serious issue of the applicant's credibility and is related to the factors set out in sections 96 and 97 of the Act;
b) Whether the evidence is central to the decision with respect to the application for protection; and
c) Whether the evidence, if accepted, would justify allowing the application for protection.
[15]
In the case at bar, the PRRA Officer evaluated all of the evidence provided by the Applicant and found that it was insufficient to overcome the RPD findings. No negative credibility findings were made. The PRRA thus did not err in not conducting an oral hearing. Indeed, the PRRA Officer properly considered the affidavit of Jairo and the letter provided by the Applicant's sister. The PRRA Officer discussed how both of these documents do not make any reference to the FARC or to any information connecting the incidents discussed in those documents to the Applicant's fear of the FARC. Moreover, the PRRA Officer noted that these individuals also have an interest in the outcome of the Applicant's PRRA application and are not objective sources (Applicant's Record, page 11). Thus, the PRRA Officer properly explained why it afforded little weight to these documents (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). As for the newspaper articles and the death certificates provided by the Applicant, the PRRA Officer properly concluded that these documents do not connect the alleged murders to the FARC. The PRRA Officer also analysed the information provided regarding the Applicant's son's situation and adequately concluded that the evidence provided is not enough to overcome the RPD's finding of state protection in Colombia. With regard to the Applicant's mental health supporting documentation, again, the PRRA Officer assessed the letters and concluded that they reiterate the same information presented before the RPD. Contrary to the facts set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], cited by the Applicant in support of his position, the PRRA Officer had more than only the Applicant's sworn affidavit in order to make his decision.
[16]
Furthermore, the PRRA Officer evaluated the information provided in the Applicant's affidavit in parallel with all of the other documents submitted by the Applicant, such as the death certificates, the affidavit of Jairo, the letter from the Applicant's sister and the newspaper articles. The PRRA Officer relied on the entirety of the documentation provided and its content and concluded that there was insufficient information to rebut any of the issues raised by the RPD (AR, page 193 at para 25). The PRRA Officer considered each piece of evidence and document presented in support of the PRRA application along with publicly available documentation concerning the country conditions in Colombia before coming to his conclusion to deny the PRRA application. Therefore, the PRRA Officer did not make a veiled credibility finding and there was therefore no need for an oral hearing. The intervention of this Court is not warranted.
B.
Did the PRRA Officer err in denying the Applicant's PRRA application?
[17]
A PRRA application by a failed refugee claimant is not an appeal or a reconsideration of the decision of the RPD to reject a claim for refugee protection (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
at para 12; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> supra
at para 37). That being said, a PRRA application may require consideration of some or all of the same factual and legal issues as a claim for refuge protection (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
at para 12
)
. Paragraph 113(a) of IRPA is "based on the premise that a negative refugee determination by the RPD must be respected by the PRRA Officer, unless there is new evidence of facts that might have affected the outcome of the RPD hearing if the evidence had been presented to the RPD" (
Ibid
at para 13). A PRRA Officer may properly reject evidence that addresses the same risk issue considered by the RPD if it cannot prove that the relevant facts as of the date of the PRRA application are materially different from the facts as found by the RPD (
Ibid
at para 17).
[18]
In the case at bar, the PRRA Officer concluded that the letters regarding the Applicant's mental health and his submissions of his vulnerability as an Afro-Columbian are essentially a repetition of the same information that was before the RPD. After reviewing the medical letters and the documentation pertaining to Afro-Colombians, I find the PRRA Officer's conclusion to reject those documents as new evidence reasonable. The medical letters reiterate the same concerns that were presented and evaluated by the RPD (AR, pages 78-79, 80, 181-184) and the documentation regarding Afro-Colombians predates the RPD decision and was also properly considered by the RPD. The Applicant did not demonstrate that his mental state was inadequately assessed by the RPD or that his vulnerability as an Afro-Colombian had not been properly evaluated before the RPD. The PRRA decision is thus reasonable.
[19]
With regard to state protection, the documents presented by the Applicant and analysed by the PRRA Officer did not demonstrate that state protection in Colombia would not be available to the Applicant. Indeed, the only information regarding state protection was presented via the Applicant's son's request for police protection and letters provided explaining that his son had to leave Buenaventura because of threats from violent groups. There is even evidence indicating that the son of the Applicant sought state protection and that the request by police was that "the necessary actions be taken to provide police protection and avoid future risk to the safety ..." of the son (Tribunal Record, page 119). The information provided did not demonstrate that the Applicant's son had exhausted all means of state protection or that there was a lack of interest or action by the authorities in Colombia. To the contrary, the newspaper articles presented by the Applicant even mention that the authorities are conducting investigations with regard to the murders they discuss (AR, pages 54, 63, 70). No intervention from this Court is warranted.
VIII.
Conclusion
[20]
The PRRA Officer did not need to hold an oral hearing as there were no circumstances justifying holding an oral hearing. Moreover, the decision to reject the Applicant's PRRA application is reasonable since the evidence presented by the Applicant is essentially a continuation of the evidence presented before the RPD. There is no need for this Court to intervene.
[21]
Neither party proposed a question for certification.
JUDGMENT
[22]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review of the PRRA Officer's decision dated May 26, 2014, is dismissed.
2. No serious question of general importance is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Noël
[Traduction]: Cour est saisie d'une demande d'autorisation d'introduire une demande de contrôle judiciaire conformément au paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la LIPR) relativement à la décision du 26 mai 2014 par laquelle M. Takhar, agent principal d'immigration de Citoyenneté et Immigration Canada (l'agent d'ERAR), a rejeté la demande d'examen des risques avant renvoi (demande d'ERAR) de Gilberto Micolta, le demandeur.
II.
Faits
[2]
Le demandeur est citoyen de la Colombie. Il est arrivé clandestinement à Seattle, aux États-Unis, en mai 2009.
[3]
Il est entré au Canada le 4 juillet 2009. La demande d'asile qu'il y a présentée le 6 juillet 2009 a été rejetée le 8 novembre 2012 par la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR). La demande d'autorisation et de contrôle judiciaire présentée par le demandeur à l'encontre de la décision de la SPR a été rejetée le 5 mars 2013.
[4]
Après obtention d'un report de l'exécution de la mesure de renvoi, le demandeur a présenté une demande d'ERAR en janvier 2014, laquelle a été refusée en mai 2014. C'est ce refus qui fait l'objet du présent contrôle.
III.
Décision contestée
[5]
L'agent d'ERAR soutient que le risque allégué mentionné par le demandeur est essentiellement le même que celui invoqué dans la demande présentée à la SPR, soit qu'il serait exposé au risque personnalisé d'être assassiné par des membres des
Fuerzas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(les FARC) s'il rentrait en Colombie, et qu'il n'y a pas de possibilité de protection de l'État pour qui se trouve dans sa situation.
[6]
L'agent d'ERAR se penche sur les faits survenus depuis avril 2013 relatés dans l'affidavit du demandeur et sur les lettres fournies à l'appui de la demande d'ERAR, et il conclut que les observations du demandeur ne suffisent pas à établir un lien entre le meurtre de Juan, son neveu, et la crainte que lui inspirent les FARC. L'agent d'ERAR examine également les articles de journaux soumis par le demandeur. Encore une fois, il n'y est nullement fait mention que les auteurs des meurtres sont membres des FARC. En outre, il n'y a pas suffisamment d'éléments de preuve pour réfuter les conclusions de la SPR quant à la protection offerte par l'État en Colombie.
[7]
L'agent d'ERAR conclut en outre que les trois lettres faisant état des problèmes de santé mentale du demandeur s'inscrivent dans la continuité des faits soumis à la SPR, sans plus. Par conséquent, les lettres ne remplissent pas le critère de preuves nouvelles prévu à l'alinéa 113
a
) de la LIPR.
[8]
L'agent d'ERAR conclut que le demandeur s'expose tout au plus à une simple possibilité d'être persécuté au sens de l'article 96 de la LIPR et qu'il est peu probable qu'il soit exposé à un risque de torture ou à une menace à sa vie ou qu'il soit exposé au risque de subir des traitements cruels ou inusités au sens de l'article 97 de la LIPR s'il retourne en Colombie.
IV.
Observations des parties
[9]
Selon le demandeur, l'agent d'ERAR a tiré une conclusion exprimée en termes voilés concernant la crédibilité, et il aurait dû tenir une audience s'il nourrissait des doutes au sujet des éléments de preuve que lui avait soumis le demandeur. L'agent d'ERAR a également commis une erreur en omettant d'apprécier les allégations présentées à la SPR à la lumière des nouveaux éléments de preuve, ou en omettant d'apprécier les nouveaux éléments de preuve à la lumière de la situation du demandeur. Le défendeur réplique qu'il n'y avait pas lieu de tenir une audience, étant donné que la preuve soumise par le demandeur n'est pas suffisante pour réfuter les conclusions de la SPR.
[10]
Le demandeur fait également valoir que, suivant l'interprétation présentée dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), l'agent d'ERAR a commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte des lettres des médecins. Or, selon le demandeur, l'agent d'ERAR s'est penché sur les problèmes de santé mentale du demandeur et sur sa vulnérabilité en tant qu'Afro-Colombien, et il a valablement conclu que ces deux aspects avaient déjà été pris en considération par la SPR. Les éléments de preuve soumis récemment ne révèlent aucun changement important dans la situation du demandeur.
[11]
Enfin, le demandeur soutient qu'étant donné qu'il a présenté de nouveaux éléments de preuve concernant le meurtre de proches et la disparition de son fils, il était déraisonnable de la part de l'agent d'ERAR de conclure qu'il n'avait pas réussi à réfuter les conclusions de la SPR, soit qu'il n'avait pas de crainte subjective ou qu'il n'avait pas réussi à réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État. Le défendeur, quant à lui, affirme que le demandeur n'a jamais sollicité la protection de l'État en Colombie.
V.
Questions en litige
[12]
J'ai examiné les observations et dossiers respectifs des parties, et je formule les questions en litige comme suit:
• L'agent d'ERAR a-t-il commis une erreur en ne tenant pas d'audience?
• L'agent d'ERAR a-t-il commis une erreur en rejetant la demande d'ERAR?
VI.
Norme de contrôle
[13]
La question de savoir si une audience aurait dû avoir lieu en est une d'équité procédurale qui commande donc l'application de la norme de contrôle de la décision correcte (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). La question de savoir si la décision de l'agent d'ERAR est raisonnable est une question mixte de fait et de droit et doit être contrôlée selon la norme de la décision raisonnable. La Cour ne devrait intervenir que si elle conclut que la décision est déraisonnable et qu'elle n'appartient pas « aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACS no 9, au paragraphe 47).
VII.
Analyse
A.
L'agent d'ERAR a t il commis une erreur en ne tenant pas d'audience?
[14]
En premier lieu, le demandeur soutient que l'agent d'ERAR aurait dû tenir une audience et qu'il a tiré une conclusion en termes voilés concernant la crédibilité. Il ressort clairement de l'alinéa 113
b
) de la LIPR qu'une audience ne doit être tenue que dans des circonstances exceptionnelles. Les facteurs à prendre en considération, énoncés à l'article 167 du
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
(DORS/2002-227) [le Règlement], sont les suivants:
a) l'existence d'éléments de preuve relatifs aux éléments mentionnés aux articles 96 et 97 de la Loi qui soulèvent une question importante en ce qui concerne la crédibilité du demandeur;
b) l'importance de ces éléments de preuve pour la prise de la décision relative à la demande de protection;
c) la question de savoir si ces éléments de preuve, à supposer qu'ils soient admis, justifieraient que soit accordée la protection.
[15]
En l'espèce, l'agent d'ERAR a apprécié l'ensemble de la preuve soumise par le demandeur et a conclu que celle-ci n'était pas suffisante pour réfuter les conclusions de la SPR. Aucune conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité n'a été tirée. L'agent d'ERAR n'a ainsi pas commis d'erreur en ne tenant pas d'audience. De fait, l'agent d'ERAR a convenablement examiné l'affidavit de Jairo et la lettre fournie par la sœur du demandeur. L'agent d'ERAR a expliqué qu'aucun de ces documents ne faisait référence aux FARC ni ne contenait des renseignements établissant un lien entre les incidents qui y sont décrits et la crainte qu'inspirent les FARC au demandeur. En outre, l'agent d'ERAR a souligné que ces personnes n'étaient pas des sources objectives puisqu'elles avaient également un intérêt quant à l'issue de la demande d'ERAR (Dossier du demandeur, page 11). Ainsi, l'agent d'ERAR a correctement expliqué pourquoi il avait accordé peu de valeur à ces documents (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). En ce qui a trait aux articles de journaux et aux certificats de décès soumis par le demandeur, l'agent d'ERAR a conclu à bon droit que ces documents n'avaient pas de lien avec les meurtres qui auraient été commis par les FARC. L'agent d'ERAR a également analysé les renseignements fournis au sujet de la situation du fils du demandeur, et il a valablement conclu que les éléments de preuve déposés n'étaient pas suffisants pour réfuter la conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État en Colombie. L'agent d'ERAR a également examiné les documents faisant état des problèmes de santé mentale du demandeur, et il a de nouveau conclu que ceux-ci contenaient les mêmes renseignements que ceux présentés à la SPR. Contrairement à la situation décrite dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], qu'invoque le demandeur pour appuyer sa position, l'affidavit sous serment du demandeur n'était pas le seul élément dont disposait l'agent d'ERAR pour rendre sa décision.
[16]
En outre, l'agent d'ERAR a analysé les renseignements fournis dans l'affidavit du demandeur en parallèle avec tous les autres documents soumis, soit les certificats de décès, l'affidavit de Jairo, la lettre rédigée par la sœur du demandeur et les articles de journaux. L'agent d'ERAR a tenu compte de l'ensemble des documents déposés pour conclure que les renseignements fournis ne permettaient de dissiper aucun des doutes formulés par la SPR (Dossier du demandeur, page 193, au paragraphe 25). Avant de conclure que la demande d'ERAR serait rejetée, l'agent d'ERAR a examiné chacun des éléments de preuve et documents soumis à l'appui de la demande d'ERAR et a tenu compte de tous les renseignements accessibles au public concernant la situation en Colombie. Par conséquent, l'agent n'a pas tiré de conclusion en termes voilés quant à la crédibilité, et il n'y avait pas lieu de tenir une audience. L'intervention de la Cour n'est pas requise.
B.
L'agent d'ERAR a-t-il commis une erreur en rejetant la demande d'ERAR?
[17]
La demande d'ERAR présentée par un demandeur d'asile débouté ne constitue ni un appel ni un réexamen de la décision de la SPR de rejeter une demande d'asile (arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 12; décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 37). Néanmoins, une demande d'ERAR peut nécessiter l'examen de quelques-uns ou de la totalité des mêmes points de fait ou de droit qu'une demande d'asile (arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 12). L'alinéa 113
a
) de la LIPR « repose sur l'idée que l'agent d'ERAR doit prendre acte de la décision de la SPR de rejeter la demande d'asile, à moins que des preuves nouvelles soient survenues depuis le rejet, qui auraient pu conduire la SPR à statuer autrement si elle en avait eu connaissance » (
ibidem
, au paragraphe 13). L'agent d'ERAR peut validement rejeter les preuves qui concernent le même risque que celui qu'a évalué la SPR si elles n'établissent pas que les faits pertinents tels qu'ils se présentent à la date de la demande d'ERAR sont sensiblement différents des faits constatés par la SPR (
ibidem
, au paragraphe 17).
[18]
En l'espèce, l'agent d'ERAR a conclu que les lettres faisant état des problèmes de santé mentale du demandeur et les observations de ce dernier concernant sa vulnérabilité en tant qu'Afro-Colombien reprenaient essentiellement des renseignements qui avaient été soumis à la SPR. Après examen des lettres de médecins et des documents traitant des Afro-Colombiens, je suis d'avis qu'il était raisonnable de la part de l'agent d'ERAR de conclure que ces documents ne constituaient pas des éléments de preuve nouveaux. Les lettres de médecins mentionnent les mêmes préoccupations que celles qui ont été soumises à la SPR pour examen (Dossier du demandeur, aux pages 78, 79, 80, et 181 à 184), et les documents portant sur les Afro-Colombiens sont antérieurs à la décision de la SPR, qui les a également examinés correctement. Le demandeur n'a pas démontré que ses problèmes de santé mentale avaient mal été évalués par la SPR, ou que sa vulnérabilité comme Afro-Colombien n'avait pas été évaluée correctement devant la SPR. Par conséquent, la décision de l'agent d'ERAR est raisonnable.
[19]
En ce qui a trait à la protection de l'État, les documents soumis par le demandeur et examinés par l'agent d'ERAR ne permettaient pas d'établir que le demandeur ne pourrait obtenir la protection de l'État en Colombie. De fait, les seuls renseignements soumis au sujet de la protection de l'État sont liés à une demande de protection de la police émanant du fils du demandeur ainsi qu'à des lettres expliquant que le fils du demandeur avait dû quitter Buenaventura en raison de menaces reçues de groupes violents. Certains éléments de preuve établissent même que le fils du demandeur a sollicité la protection de l'État, et que la police avait reçu la consigne de faire en sorte que [traduction] « les mesures nécessaires soient prises pour assurer une protection policière et éviter d'éventuelles menaces pour la sécurité [...] » du fils (Dossier du tribunal, à la page 119). Les renseignements soumis ne démontrent pas que le fils du demandeur avait épuisé tous les recours qui s'offraient à lui pour obtenir la protection de l'État, ni que les autorités colombiennes ne s'étaient pas intéressées à la question, ni qu'elles n'avaient rien fait. Au contraire, les articles de journaux soumis par le demandeur mentionnent même que les autorités mènent des enquêtes dans la foulée des meurtres dont il est question (Dossier du demandeur, aux pages 54, 63 et 70). Aucune intervention de la Cour n'est justifiée.
VIII.
Conclusion
[20]
L'agent d'ERAR n'avait pas à tenir d'audience, parce qu'aucune circonstance ne le justifiait. Qui plus est, il était raisonnable de la part de l'agent d'ERAR de rejeter la demande d'ERAR du demandeur, qui a déposé une preuve qui s'inscrivait essentiellement dans la continuité de celle présentée à la SPR. Il n'y a pas lieu que la Cour intervienne.
[21]
Aucune des parties n'a proposé de question aux fins de certification.
JUGEMENT
[22]
LA COUR ORDONNE
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire de la décision rendue par l'agent d'ERAR le 26 mai 2014 est rejetée.
2. Aucune question grave de portée générale n'est certifiée.
[End of document]