 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Mohammad  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 547)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Strickland, J.
June 5, 2014.
Counsel:
Eve Sehatzadeh, for the applicant;
Christopher Crighton, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Eve Sehatzadeh, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Strickland, J.
: The Applicant seeks judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (RPD), dated April 2, 2013 in which it concluded that he was not a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection pursuant to sections 96 or 97, respectively, of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (IRPA).
Background
[2]
The Applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan. He claims that while driving to a wedding his car was hit by Zarghun, whose brother is a member of Parliament, when Zarghun attempted to overtake the Applicant's vehicle. In the ensuing argument, Zarghun drew a gun and threatened to kill the Applicant and others in the wedding party. In self defence, the Applicant's cousin shot and killed Zarghun. The Applicant and Zarghun were from the same village and, as a result of this incident, a blood feud arose. Although the Applicant went into hiding, men on a motorcycle subsequently attempted to shoot him. Fearing for his life and utilizing a human smuggler, he fled to Canada. On arrival in Canada, he applied for refugee status at the airport and, on the advice of the smuggler, identified himself as his cousin. A short time later, at a detention hearing, he acknowledged his true identity.
Decision Under Review
[3]
The RPD found that the Applicant was not a Convention refugee under section 96 as he did not have a well-founded fear and was not a person in need of protection pursuant to section 97 as his removal would not subject him personally to a risk to life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, or to a danger of torture. The determinative issue was credibility.
[4]
The principal credibility issue was that when the Applicant arrived in Canada, he told a "systematic lie" in an effort to obtain refugee protection by claiming that he was his cousin and that it was he who had shot and killed Zarghun. The RPD noted that the Applicant changed his evidence when he revealed his true identity at a detention hearing. It also noted that he had explained that he had made a mistake and had given the false identity on the advice of the smuggler who told him that if he gave his real name, he would be deported back to Afghanistan on the same plane on which he arrived and that his claim would have a better chance of success if he were to assume his cousin's identity. However, once he was in Canada, he felt that he could tell the truth. The RPD did not accept the explanation.
[5]
The RPD stated that this was not a section 96 claim as there was no nexus to a Convention ground but, even if it was, it would fail based on credibility. As to the section 97 claim, the RPD found that the Applicant had not satisfactorily documented the alleged shooting, the existence of his cousin or of Zarghun, or, that the latter's brother was a member of Parliament. The RPD also noted that the Applicant made a new allegation in his third Personal Information Form (PIF), which was submitted over a year after his first two PIFs, indicating that an effort was made by family elders to defuse the blood feud. It found this to be an important allegation in light of the PIF instructions to describe steps taken to seek state protection. Because the Applicant could not explain why this information was not mentioned in the first two PIFs, the RPD found it to be an embellishment from which it made a negative inference as to credibility.
[6]
As to the letter from the village elders, this was dated 2009 but the subject events occurred in August 2010. The Applicant suggested that everything was old fashioned in Afghanistan and perhaps the elders had used the stamp they had in their possession. The RPD found that this did not explain why 2009 was also written in the body of one of the letters. While the Applicant suggested that the elders are barely literate, he could not explain how they could then write the detailed letters. The RPD afforded the letters little weight. It concluded that the Applicant's evidence overall was not credible and that insufficient evidence had been provided to support his claim.
Analysis
[7]
The Applicant submits, amongst other things, that the RPD erred in finding that the village elders' efforts to defuse the blood feud were an embellishment. This was not a material omission because community based dispute resolution is not an effort to seek state protection, instead it requires that the parties agree to a settlement. Further, the alleged events and the elders' efforts were corroborated by their letter which was not expressly found to be fraudulent. The RPD cannot accept the letter and then use it to impugn the Applicant's credibility. The Applicant also provided a reasonable explanation as to why he submitted an amended PIF and why certain corroborating evidence was not available or produced which the RPD did not consider. The RPD erred in impugning the Applicant's credibility without regard to the explanation offered and, on the basis of his admitted lie, by failing to assess evidence that led to a contradictory finding (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The second PIF was submitted a day after his original PIF, it was not signed or complete, and the RPD therefore erred in viewing it as a missed opportunity to provide more details. The Applicant also submitted that the RPD provided inadequate reasons for making a general negative credibility finding.
[8]
In my view, the RPD reasonably found that the Applicant was not credible and that he provided insufficient evidence to corroborate his allegations. Further, its reasons are sufficient to allow the Court to understand why it made its decision and to determine whether it is within the range of acceptable outcomes (
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 16). The RPD found that the Applicant was not credible mainly because he falsified his identity at the port of entry, altered his story when revealing his true identity, and, omitted to include the involvement of elders his first two PIFs. Further, the RPD found that the Applicant produced insufficient evidence in support of his claim.
[9]
There is no doubt that the RPD is entitled to draw an negative inference as to the Applicant's credibility based on his falsification of his identity, particularly as this was intended to enhance his refugee claim (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), which was the underlying premise of the explanation offered by the Applicant. The Applicant's Claim for Refugee Protection in Canada, dated December 30, 2010, contained the false information. While in detention he admitted to his real identity and his first PIF, dated February 3, 2011, acknowledged this and stated that it was his cousin who shot Zarghun. Thus, while the RPD's characterization of this as a "systematic lie" may be open to question, the fact of the falsification remains. And, while he did offer an explanation for this, being that the smuggler told him that his claim would be more likely to succeed if he were the person who shot Zarghun, the RPD considered but did not accept it. The RPD was entitled to reject the explanation (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), particularly because Canada is generally unlikely to be more welcoming to individuals who have killed others.
[10]
Further, the credibility finding was not based on this alone. The RPD also noted that the Applicant did not mention the effort by the elders to diffuse the blood feud in his first and second PIFs. Rather, that it arose for the first time in his PIF prepared on June 20, 2012, over a year later. In my view, this was a significant omission because it established that an unsuccessful effort had been made by the village elders to diffuse the feud. This was central to Applicant's claim as it addressed whether he would be at a risk in Afghanistan. It is open to the RPD to base credibility findings on omissions and inconsistencies in a claimant's evidence, including where the omissions have to do with facts that directly concern the very basis of the claim for protection, as was the case here (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). While the RPD found that the Applicant did not offer an explanation for this omission, the transcript of the hearing indicates that he stated that it was because he was not asked. It is clear that the RPD could not have accepted this as a satisfactory explanation. It reasonably found that the addition to the last PIF was an embellishment.
[11]
As to the supporting documentation, in my view this was a situation where the RPD's concern with the lack of corroborative documents was warranted given its credibility finding (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). It was also open for the RPD to consider the letters from the elders in the context of its credibility concerns (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The two letters from the elders, being essentially the same letter, are, according to the translation, date stamped "2008/2009". Thus, while the letters purport to establish that the elders witnessed the shooting, and to describe their effort to diffuse the blood feud, the subject events did not take place until 2010. The RPD reasonably refused to accept the Applicant's suggestion that the elders used an old date stamp or that the date was explained because of their lower level of literacy given that they wrote the letter in the first place. The Applicant submits that the RPD conflated the elders' letter with that of a letter from the police as in the decision it states that the date was also found within the body of the letter. While it is true that the elders' letter only includes the date (year 2008/2009) as a stamp and the police letter contains the date August 20, 2009, both at the top of the letter and in its body, I do not see how this assists the Applicant. Both letters are dated prior to 2010 which is when the Applicant claimed that the killing and resultant events occurred.
[12]
The RPD's concern with the date was valid and it was, therefore, entitled to give the letters little weight (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paras 59-61). I am also of the view, and contrary to the Applicant's submissions, that in these circumstances nothing turns on the fact that the RPD did not make a finding that the letters were not genuine.
[13]
As to the submission that, because the RPD found that the Applicant admitted to a previous lie it did not assess the evidence that might have contradicted its credibility finding, as noted above the RPD did assess the letters from the elders. Other than a letter which confirmed that the Applicant had worked in a car dealership, he did not provide any further corroborating evidence. Here, the RPD weighed, and did not ignore, the evidence (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[14]
Although the Applicant submits that the Board unreasonably sought other corroborating evidence such as police reports, a death certificate for Zarghun and proof of the damage to his car and that he reasonably explained why this could not be provided, it does not appear that the RPD drew an adverse inference of credibility from the Applicant's failure to produce further corroborating evidence. Instead, it appears to have found that there was insufficient evidence to document the Applicant's allegations. This was a reasonable finding for the reasons set out above. In any event, the onus is always upon the claimant to prove its claim. As Justice Pinard stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "it is trite law that the applicant bears the onus of establishing the elements of his claim for protection" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). And, as noted above, even if the Board used the lack of corroborating documentation to support its credibility finding, here it would have been open for it to do so as it questioned the Applicant's credibility.
[15]
Credibility findings are reviewable on the standard of reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA)). That standard also applies to the RPD's weighing, interpretation and assessment of the evidence ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 19). In my view, considering the decision in whole and the record before the RPD, its decision was reasonable as it falls within a range of acceptable and possible outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
JUDGMENT
[16]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
1. This application for judicial review is dismissed;
2. No question is certified.
.........................
Mohammad  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeur sollicite le contrôle judiciaire de la décision rendue le 2 avril 2013 dans laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés (SPR) de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada a conclu qu'il n'avait ni la qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention ni celle de personne à protéger au sens des articles 96 et 97, respectivement, de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (LIPR).
Contexte
[2]
Le demandeur est un citoyen de l'Afghanistan. Il prétend que, tandis qu'il se rendait à un mariage, sa voiture a été frappée par Zarghun, dont le frère est député, quand Zarghun a tenté de doubler son véhicule. Lors de l'altercation qui a suivi, Zarghun a sorti une arme à feu et menacé de tuer le demandeur et d'autres membres du cortège. En état de légitime défense, le cousin du demandeur a tiré et tué Zarghun. Le demandeur et Zarghun venaient du même village et, suite à cet incident, une vendetta a été déclenchée. Le demandeur s'est caché, mais des hommes en motocyclette ont ensuite tenté de lui tirer dessus. Craignant pour sa vie, il a obtenu l'aide d'un passeur et est venu au Canada. À son arrivée au Canada, il a présenté une demande d'asile à l'aéroport et, suivant les conseils du passeur, il s'est identifié comme étant son cousin. Peu de temps après, lors d'une audience relative à la détention, il a reconnu sa véritable identité.
Décision faisant l'objet du contrôle
[3]
La SPR a conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas qualité de réfugié au sens de l'article 96 puisqu'il n'avait pas une crainte fondée et qu'il n'avait pas non plus qualité de personne à protéger en vertu de l'article 97 puisque son renvoi ne mettrait pas sa vie en danger ou ne l'exposerait pas à des traitements ou peines cruels ou inusités, ou à un risque de torture. La question déterminante était la crédibilité.
[4]
La principale question de la crédibilité portait sur le fait que, lorsque le demandeur est arrivé au Canada, il a « systématiquement menti » dans le but d'obtenir l'asile en affirmant qu'il était son cousin et qu'il avait tiré et tué Zarghun. La SPR a constaté que le demandeur avait modifié son témoignage quand il a révélé sa véritable identité à l'audience relative à la détention. Elle a également fait remarquer que le demandeur avait expliqué qu'il avait fait une erreur et qu'il avait donné une fausse identité en suivant les conseils du passeur qui lui avait dit que, s'il donnait son véritable nom, il serait renvoyé en Afghanistan à bord de l'avion même qu'il avait pris pour venir au Canada et qu'il y avait plus de chances que sa demande soit accueillie s'il usurpait l'identité de son cousin. Cependant, une fois au Canada, il sentait qu'il pouvait révéler sa vérité. La SPR n'a pas accepté son explication.
[5]
La SPR a dit qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une demande fondée sur l'article 96 puisqu'elle n'avait aucun lien avec l'un des motifs énoncés dans la Convention, mais que, même s'il s'agissait d'une telle demande, elle serait rejetée pour des motifs liés à la crédibilité. S'agissant de la demande fondée sur l'article 97, la SPR a conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas établi de manière convaincante que la fusillade avait eu lieu, que son cousin ou Zarghun existaient ou que le frère de ce dernier était député. La SPR a aussi souligné que le demandeur a formulé une nouvelle allégation dans son troisième formulaire de renseignements personnels (FPR), lequel a été déposé plus d'un an après les deux premiers, dans lequel il déclarait que les aînés des familles tentaient de mettre fin à la vendetta opposant les deux familles. La SPR estimait qu'il s'agissait là d'une allégation importante vu les directives relatives au FRP selon lesquelles le demandeur doit décrire les mesures prises pour obtenir la protection de l'État. Comme le demandeur ne pouvait pas expliquer pourquoi ces renseignements ne figuraient pas dans les deux premiers formulaires, la SPR a considéré cette allégation comme un embellissement. Elle en a donc tiré une conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité.
[6]
En ce qui concerne la lettre rédigée par les aînés du village, elle datait de 2009 alors que les événements en question sont survenus en août 2010. Le demandeur a laissé entendre que tout était désuet en Afghanistan et que les aînés avaient peut-être simplement utilisé le timbre dateur qu'ils avaient en leur possession. La SPR a conclu que cela n'expliquait pas pourquoi il était aussi écrit 2009 dans le corps d'une des lettres. Le demandeur a affirmé que les aînés savent à peine lire et écrire, mais il ne pouvait pas expliquer comment ils avaient pu écrire ces lettres détaillées. La SPR a accordé peu de poids aux lettres. Elle a conclu que la preuve du demandeur dans son ensemble n'était pas crédible et que les éléments de preuve fournis étaient insuffisants pour étayer sa demande.
Analyse
[7]
Le demandeur prétend notamment que la SPR a commis une erreur en concluant que les efforts déployés par les aînés du village pour mettre fin à la vendetta constituaient un embellissement. Cela ne constituait pas une omission importante puisque le règlement des différends dans la collectivité ne vise pas à obtenir la protection de l'État; il faut plutôt que les parties s'entendent. De plus, les événements qui auraient eu lieu et les efforts déployés par les aînés étaient corroborés par leur lettre, laquelle n'a pas été expressément considérée comme frauduleuse. La SPR ne peut pas accepter la lettre et s'en servir pour attaquer la crédibilité du demandeur. Ce dernier a aussi raisonnablement expliqué sa décision de déposer un FPR modifié et le fait que certains éléments de preuve corroborants n'existaient pas ou n'avaient pas été produits, mais la SPR n'en a pas tenu compte. La SPR a commis une erreur en attaquant la crédibilité du demandeur sans tenir compte de l'explication offerte et, vu le fait qu'il a avoué avoir menti, en omettant d'apprécier la preuve qui permettait de tirer une conclusion contradictoire (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Le deuxième FPR a été déposé le lendemain du FPR initial; il n'était ni signé ni complet. La SPR a donc commis une erreur en le considérant comme une occasion manquée de fournir plus de détails. Le demandeur a aussi affirmé que les motifs fournis par la SPR pour justifier sa conclusion générale défavorable en matière de crédibilité n'étaient pas adéquats.
[8]
À mon avis, la SPR a raisonnablement conclu que le demandeur n'était pas crédible et qu'il n'avait pas fourni suffisamment d'éléments de preuve pour corroborer ses allégations. De plus, ses motifs sont suffisants pour permettre à la Cour de comprendre sa décision et de déterminer si elle appartient aux issues acceptables (
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 16). La SPR a conclu que le demandeur n'était pas crédible principalement parce qu'il a falsifié son identité au point d'entrée, qu'il a modifié son récit quand il a révélé sa véritable identité et qu'il a omis de mentionner la participation des aînés dans ses deux premiers FPR. La SPR a aussi conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas produit suffisamment d'éléments de preuve pour étayer sa demande.
[9]
Il ne fait aucun doute que la SPR peut tirer une inférence négative quant à la crédibilité du demandeur en se fondant sur le fait qu'il a falsifié son identité, plus particulièrement parce que cela avait pour but de renforcer sa demande d'asile (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 16;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), ce qui était le fondement de l'explication offerte par le demandeur. La demande d'asile au Canada du demandeur, datée du 30 décembre 2010, contenait les faux renseignements. Pendant qu'il était en détention, il a révélé sa véritable identité et, dans son premier FPR daté du 3 février 2011, il a reconnu ce fait et a déclaré que c'était son cousin qui avait tiré sur Zarghun. Par conséquent, bien qu'on puisse contester le fait que la SPR ait affirmé que le demandeur avait « systématiquement menti », il reste qu'il a falsifié son identité. Il a offert une explication, c'est-à-dire que le passeur lui aurait dit qu'il avait plus de chances de voir sa demande accueillie s'il était la personne qui avait tiré sur Zarghun et la SPR en a tenu compte, mais ne l'a pas acceptée. La SPR avait le droit de rejeter l'explication (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), surtout parce qu'il est peu probable que le Canada soit plus tolérant envers les personnes ayant commis un meurtre.
[10]
De plus, la conclusion quant à la crédibilité ne reposait pas seulement sur ce fait. La SPR a aussi souligné que le demandeur n'a pas mentionné les efforts déployés par les aînés pour mettre fin à la vendetta dans ses deux premiers FPR. Il l'a mentionné pour la première fois dans son FPR du 20 juin 2012, plus d'un an plus tard. À mon avis, il s'agissait d'une omission importante puisqu'elle démontrait que les aînés du village avaient tenté, en vain, de résoudre la situation. Il s'agissait là d'un aspect fondamental de la demande du demandeur puisqu'il se rapportait à la question de savoir s'il serait exposé à un risque en Afghanistan. La SPR peut fonder ses conclusions relatives à la crédibilité sur les omissions et les incohérences qui entachent la preuve du demandeur, y compris quand les omissions se rapportent directement à des faits qui touchent le fondement même de la demande de protection, comme c'était le cas en l'espèce (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 36;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). La SPR a conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas justifié cette omission, mais la transcription de l'audience indique qu'il a affirmé que personne ne lui a demandé. Il est clair que la SPR aurait pu trouver cette explication satisfaisante. Elle a raisonnablement conclu que l'ajout à son dernier FPR constituait un embellissement.
[11]
En ce qui concerne les documents à l'appui de la demande, il était, à mon avis, justifié pour la SPR d'être préoccupée par l'absence de documents corroborants vu la conclusion qu'elle avait rendue quant à la crédibilité (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). La SPR pouvait également examiner les lettres rédigées par les aînés en tenant compte de ses doutes en matière de crédibilité (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Les deux lettres des aînés, lesquelles sont essentiellement la même lettre, portent, selon la traduction, un timbre indiquant « 2008/2009 ». Par conséquent, bien que les lettres soient censées établir que les aînés ont été témoins de la fusillade et décrire leurs efforts pour mettre fin à la vendetta, les événements en question n'ont eu lieu qu'en 2010. La SPR a raisonnablement rejeté la proposition du demandeur selon laquelle les aînés ont utilisé un vieux timbre dateur ou que la date était attribuable au fait qu'ils ne savent pas bien lire et écrire vu qu'ils ont écrit la lettre. Le demandeur soutient que la SPR a confondu la lettre des aînés avec une lettre de la police puisqu'il est indiqué dans la décision que la date se retrouvait aussi dans le corps de la lettre. Il est vrai que la lettre des aînés porte seulement le timbre (année 2008/2009) et que la lettre de la police indique la date du 20 août 2009, en haut et dans le corps de la lettre, mais je ne vois pas en quoi cela aide le demandeur. Les deux lettres portent une date antérieure à 2010, soit l'année où le demandeur prétend que la fusillade et les événements subséquents ont eu lieu.
[12]
La préoccupation de la SPR quant à la date était fondée. Il lui était donc loisible d'accorder peu d'importance à ces lettres (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 16). Je conviens avec le défendeur que ce que le demandeur sollicite équivaut à une nouvelle appréciation de la preuve, ce que la Cour ne peut pas faire (
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aux paragraphes 59 à 61). J'estime aussi, contrairement à ce que soutient le demandeur, qu'il ne faut, dans les circonstances, attacher aucune importance au fait que la SPR n'a pas conclu que les lettres n'étaient pas authentiques.
[13]
Comme je l'ai déjà dit, s'agissant de l'argument selon lequel la SPR n'a pas apprécié la preuve qui aurait pu contredire sa conclusion quant à la crédibilité parce qu'elle a conclu que le demandeur avait avoué avoir menti, la SPR a bel et bien évalué les lettres des aînés. À l'exception d'une lettre qui confirmait qu'il avait travaillé pour un concessionnaire automobile, le demandeur n'a fourni aucun autre document corroborant. En l'espèce, la SPR a évalué la preuve, et n'a pas omis d'en tenir compte (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[14]
Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a agi de manière déraisonnable lorsqu'elle a demandé d'autres éléments de preuve corroborants, comme des rapports de police, le certificat de décès de Zarghun et une preuve des dommages causés à sa voiture et qu'il avait raisonnablement expliqué les raisons pour lesquelles il lui était impossible de fournir de tels documents, mais rien n'indique que la SPR ait tiré une conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité du demandeur du fait que ce dernier n'ait pas produit d'autres éléments de preuve corroborants. Elle semble plutôt avoir conclu qu'il n'y avait pas suffisamment d'éléments de preuve pour étayer les allégations du demandeur. Cette conclusion était raisonnable, compte tenu des motifs énoncés ci-dessus. Quoi qu'il en soit, il incombe toujours au demandeur d'établir le bien-fondé de sa demande. Comme le juge Pinard l'a souligné dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> « il est de droit constant qu'il revient au demandeur d'établir les éléments de sa demande d'asile » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Et, je le répète, même si la Commission a invoqué l'absence de documents corroborants pour étayer sa conclusion quant à la crédibilité, elle pouvait le faire puisqu'elle doutait de la crédibilité du demandeur.
[15]
Les conclusions relatives à la crédibilité sont susceptibles de révision selon la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA)). Cette norme s'applique aussi à l'appréciation et à l'interprétation de la preuve par la SPR ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 19). À mon avis, compte tenu de l'ensemble de la décision et du dossier dont disposait la SPR, la décision était raisonnable puisqu'elle appartient aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
JUGEMENT
[16]
LA COUR STATUE que
1. la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée;
2. aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]