 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chandidas v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2013), 429 F.T.R. 44 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2013] F.T.R. TBEd. MR.043 
 
 
 
 Gautam Chandidas, Rekha Chandidas, Karan Chandidas, Kunal Chandidas and Rhea Chandidas (applicants) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent) 
 
 (IMM-1748-12; 2013 FC 257; 2013 CF 257) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Chandidas v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Kane, J. 
 
 March 8, 2013. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The applicants applied for refugee status based on the principal applicant's fear of persecution due to his experience in India. The principal applicant, who was Hindu, refused his Muslim employees time off for daily prayers. A fatwa was issued by a local mosque calling for his execution. The Immigration and Refugee Board denied the applicants' claim for refugee protection. Leave for judicial review was denied. An immigration officer refused their pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA). Their application on humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) grounds was refused by the same officer. The application for judicial review of the PRRA decision was heard at the same time as the application for judicial review of the H&C decision. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court, in separate reasons for judgment reported at (2013) 429 F.T.R. 55, granted the application for judicial review of the H&C decision. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court granted the application for judicial review of the PRRA decision. The determinative issue was the internal flight alternative (IFA) finding. The IFA finding was not reasonable given the needs of the principal applicant's daughter for adequate treatment for cancer. The barriers to treatment made the IFA in Mumbai unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 4 
 
 Definitions and general principles - Children - [See second  
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection - Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Persecution - Protection of country of nationality or citizenship (internal flight alternative) - [See first  
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112 - 116) - Application for protection (IRPA, s. 112) (incl. procedure and considerations) - A senior immigration officer refused the applicants' pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) - The officer found that the applicants had an internal flight alternative (IFA) in Mumbai and as a result, that they would not be subject to a risk of persecution, danger of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if returned to their country of nationality, India - In reaching that conclusion, the officer considered the principal applicant's submission about the fatwa issued against him and which indicated that the family had no IFA - The Federal Court allowed the judicial review application - The IFA finding was not reasonable given the needs of the principal applicant's daughter for adequate treatment for cancer - The barriers to treatment made the IFA in Mumbai unreasonable - See paragraphs 18 to 20, 45 to 49. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112 - 116) - Application for protection (IRPA, s. 112) (incl. procedure and considerations) - An immigration officer refused the applicants' pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) - The applicants sought judicial review - They submitted that because Canada was a signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, a best-interest-of-the-child (BIOC) analysis should have been conducted by the officer, given the needs of the principal applicant's daughter for specialised cancer treatment - The Federal Court stated that the better opportunity to consider the BIOC was in the context of a humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) application - The applicants had made an H&C application, which was refused by the same officer who refused the PRRA - Judicial review had been granted for the H&C decision upon finding that the officer failed to conduct an appropriate BIOC analysis - In the context of the PRRA, the officer did engage in a partial analysis of the BIOC in determining that an internal flight alternative (Mumbai) existed - The officer's conclusion that there was little evidence that medical treatment would not be available in Mumbai was not reasonable - See paragraphs 31 to 44. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1588 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112 - 116) - Evidence (IRPA, s. 113(a)) - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1590 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1590 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112 - 116) - Duty of fairness - An immigration officer refused the applicants' pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) - The officer found that the applicants (citizens of India) had an internal flight alternative in Mumbai and as a result, that they would not be subject to a risk of persecution, danger of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if returned to India - On judicial review, the applicants submitted that the officer breached the duty of fairness by failing to disclose to the applicants extrinsic evidence (a 2007 Immigration and Refugee Board Response to Information Request (RIR) on fatawa) which the officer relied on - The Federal Court held that the failure to disclose the publicly available RIR was not a breach of procedural fairness - "Section 113 of the Act only restricts the applicants' ability to adduce such information; it does not restrict the ability of the officer to use information that is not 'new'." - In this case, the RIR was public information and provided balanced and general information about fatawa - Moreover, the applicants did seek to introduce evidence about the risk to them of the fatwa - See paragraphs 21 to 30. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27, sect. 113(a) [para. 24]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Jeremiah Eastman, for the applicant; 
 
 Kevin Doyle, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Eastman Law Office, Professional Corporation, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on October 2, 2012, before Kane, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following reasons for judgment and judgment, dated March 8, 2013, at Ottawa, Ontario. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Kane, J. 
 : This is an application for judicial review pursuant to section 72 of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , SC 2001, c 27 [the  
 Act 
 ], of the decision of a senior immigration officer (the officer), dated January 12, 2012, which refused the applicants' pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) and found that the applicants would not be subject to a risk of persecution, danger of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if returned to their country of nationality, India. 
 
 
 
 Background 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The Chandidas family seeks judicial review of their negative PRRA decision. A brief description of the Chandidas' time in Canada is provided to situate this application. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Guatam Chandidas, the principal applicant, is a citizen of India who arrived in Canada on a visitor's visa in August 2007. His wife, two sons and daughter arrived in November 2007. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The applicants applied for refugee status in May 2008 based on the principal applicant's fear of persecution due to his experience in India. Mr Chandidas, who is Hindu, owned a garment factory in New Delhi that employed many Muslims. The Muslim employees demanded time off for daily prayers, which he refused due to production demands. Following a strike, he closed his factory. In retaliation, he was kidnapped twice and threatened. A fatwa was issued by a local mosque calling for his execution. Mr Chandidas fled and claims that he and his family cannot return to India. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The Immigration and Refugee Board [the Board] denied the applicants' claim for refugee protection, finding that his claims lacked credibility, that a fatwa had not been issued and that the applicants had no subjective fear of persecution. Leave for judicial review of the negative decision was denied on September 8, 2011. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In November 2011, the applicants applied for a PRRA, which reiterated the risks stated in the refugee protection claim. The principal applicant claimed that he and his family had no internal flight alternative. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  On January 12, 2012, the PRRA officer refused the application. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  In July 2010, prior to seeking the PRRA, the applicants had submitted an application for permanent residence from within Canada on humanitarian and compassionate [H&C] grounds based on the best interests of their child [BIOC] and on their establishment in Canada. The H&C application was refused by the same officer who refused the PRRA application and on the same day, January 12, 2012. The application for judicial review of the H&C decision was heard at the same time as the current application and was granted. Separate reasons for judgment were issued and can be found at  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  On March 13, 2012, this Court granted the applicants' motion to stay their removal from Canada. 
 
 
 
 Decision under Review 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The officer found that the applicants had an internal flight alternative [IFA] in Mumbai and as a result, that they would not be subject to a risk of persecution, danger of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if returned to India. The officer concluded that the applicants were not in need of protection under sections 96 or 97 of the  
 Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  In reaching this conclusion, the officer considered the principle applicant's submission about the fatwa issued against him and which indicated that the family had no IFA. Due to their daughter Rhea's treatment and follow-up care for relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL], the applicants indicated that the only possible treatment center would be in Mumbai, where the principal applicant could be found by Muslims wanting to execute the fatwa. However, the applicants also submitted that this treatment center would not provide the treatment Rhea needed, putting the child's health and, possibly, life at risk. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The officer rejected some documents submitted by the applicants on the basis that they did not constitute "new evidence" pursuant to paragraph 113 (a) of the  
 Act 
 , since they pre-dated the applicants' refugee claim. These documents included news reports on fatawa [see footnote 1] and police dysfunction and impunity in India. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  However, the officer accepted other documents as new evidence, while noting that they should be excluded under paragraph 113 (a) of the  
 Act 
 . These documents related to the possibility of an IFA, which the Board had not examined. The officer accepted a letter from Dr Truong at Sick Kids Hospital in Toronto, describing the treatment needed, and an Executive Summary of the India Pediatric Oncology Initiative Meeting supported by the Jiv Daya Foundation, which described the barriers to treatment of childhood cancer in India. The officer also accepted a copy of a recent unsigned letter from the principal applicant's estate manager in India, which described the active status of the fatwa against him. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The officer indicated that he attributed significant weight to the findings of the Board, according to which the applicants did not face a risk of persecution. The officer noted that the principal applicant reiterated the same risks: that he fears Muslims in India because of the fatwa issued against him and he fears being executed, and that there is a lack of state protection due to the sheer number of Muslims in India. The officer attributed little weight to the letter provided by the applicant as new evidence of the active status of the fatwa. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  However, the officer did not make an explicit finding that a fatwa had not been issued. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  In assessing the forward-looking risk, the officer considered current country condition documents. These included a 2010 United States Department of State report describing India's democratic political system, as well as a 2007 Immigration and Refugee Board Response to Information Request [RIR] which examined fatawa in general. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The officer concluded that the applicants had a reasonable and viable IFA in Mumbai because there was little evidence to suggest that the authority who issued the fatwa had far-reaching influence that would endanger the principal applicant there. The officer also concluded that the applicants would adapt to new environments, and that Rhea would have access to treatment for ALL in Mumbai. 
 
 
 
 The Issues 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Three issues arise in this application: whether the officer breached the duty of procedural fairness by relying on the RIR, which was public information but had not been disclosed to the applicants; whether the officer failed to consider Rhea's best interests, as required by paragraph 3(3)(f) of the  
 Act 
  (which provides that the  
 Act 
  is to be applied and construed in a manner that complies with international human rights instruments to which Canada is a signatory); and, whether the officer's IFA finding was reasonable. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  It is well settled that questions of mixed law and fact are assessed on a reasonableness standard, and questions of law and procedural fairness are assessed on a correctness standard:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  While all three issues are canvassed below, I find that the determinative issue is the IFA finding. The IFA finding was not reasonable given the needs of the child, Rhea, for adequate treatment for ALL. It should be noted that the application for judicial review of the negative H&C decision was granted in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, where the officer's assessment of the BIOC was found to be inadequate. The evidence with respect to the seriousness of ALL and the barriers to the availability of treatment in India was part of the record before the officer in both applications. The barriers to treatment make the IFA in Mumbai unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 Did the officer breach the duty of procedural fairness by relying on the RIR, which was public information but had not been disclosed to the applicants? 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The applicants submit that the officer breached the duty of fairness by failing to disclose extrinsic evidence, i.e. the 2007 RIR on fatawa, which the officer relied upon in determining that the fatwa would not be operative beyond the area of the principal applicant's former factory, and not in Mumbai, and in failing to provide the applicants an opportunity to respond. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The applicants argue that the document was not available to them due to paragraph 113 (a) of the  
 Act 
 , which prevents PRRA applicants from relying upon evidence that pre-dates the rejection of their refugee claim (in this case, May 11, 2011). The applicants contend that this provision prevents them from making submissions to rebut the evidence relied upon by the officer because the evidence existed prior to the determination of the refugee claim - it was not "new" evidence. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  The respondent submits that there was no breach of procedural fairness since the officer was not required to notify the applicants that he would be relying upon public sources regarding general country conditions:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Section 113 (a) of the  
 Act 
  relates specifically to PRRA applications and provides: 
 
 
 
 113. 
  Consideration of an application for protection shall be as follows: 
 
 
 
 ( 
 a 
 ) an applicant whose claim to refugee protection has been rejected may present only  
 new evidence that arose after the rejection or was not reasonably available 
 , or that the applicant could not reasonably have been expected in the circumstances to have presented, at the time of the rejection; [emphasis added] 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 113. 
  Il est disposé de la demande comme il suit: 
 
 
 
 a 
 ) le demandeur d'asile débouté ne peut présenter que des  
 éléments de preuve survenus depuis le rejet ou qui n'étaient alors pas normalement accessibles 
  ou, s'ils l'étaient, qu'il n'était pas raisonnable, dans les circonstances, de s'attendre à ce qu'il les ait présentés au moment du rejet; [je souligne] 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED the Court considered how the duty of procedural fairness applies with respect to the disclosure of public documents. Justice Blais, as he then was, noted: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [26] 
  The applicants' concern relates to the fact that they could not adduce any evidence (old or new) to rebut the information included in the RIR because they were not aware that the officer was relying on this information to begin with. The applicants note that if they had been aware of the officer's reliance on the RIR and if they had evidence to rebut this that pre-dated the IRB decision (for example, that reflected the same time period as noted in the RIR), they would have been precluded from raising this due to section 113 of the  
 Act 
 , and that this is unfair. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  In this case, the applicants claimed that a fatwa was issued and the onus was on them to establish that risk, which they endeavored to do in their submissions to the Board and in their submissions to the officer with the new letter from the estate manager. It should not be surprising that the officer would inform himself about fatawa in general. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  In my view, the failure to disclose the publicly available RIR is not a breach of procedural fairness. Section 113 of the  
 Act 
  only restricts the applicants' ability to adduce such information; it does not restrict the ability of the officer to use information that is not "new". The information was publicly available and the applicants could have accessed it. The applicants were deemed to be aware of it. Moreover, they had presented other new evidence regarding the fatwa, to which the officer attributed little weight. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  In some circumstances, section 113 of the  
 Act 
  may place an applicant in a 'catch 22' situation when the officer relies on new evidence (of which the applicant is not aware), but the applicant is restricted in rebutting that new evidence. In this case, the RIR was public information and provided balanced and general information about fatawa. The officer cited excerpts including the following: "Even though a fatwa may not be recognized by the government, the group that issued it takes it seriously. In such a case, a fatwa issued against an individual can be just as dangerous as if it were government action against the individual". Moreover, the applicants did seek to introduce evidence about the risk to them of the fatwa. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  In these circumstances, there was no breach of procedural fairness as a result of the officer's reliance on the publicly available RIR. 
 
 
 
 Did the officer fail to consider the best interests of Rhea, as required by paragraph 3 (3)(f) of the Act, which provides that the Act is to be applied and construed in a manner that complies with international human rights instruments to which Canada is a signatory? 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  The applicants submit that because Canada is a signatory to the  
 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 
  [ 
 UNCRC 
 ], the  
 Act 
  must be interpreted in accordance with the Convention and therefore a BIOC analysis should have been conducted by the officer for the PRRA. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  The respondent submits that the  
 UNCRC 
  does not require that the interests of affected children be considered under every provision of the  
 Act 
 :  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. The  
 Act 
  provides an effective opportunity to consider the BIOC pursuant to section 25, in H&C applications. Although the same officer may conduct the PRRA and the H&C assessment, these are separate decision-making processes with different considerations and tests. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  The two decision-making processes are indeed separate. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, the Federal Court of Appeal held that the best interests of the child need not be considered in every decision if there is another opportunity for such considerations: 
 
 
 
 [13] Neither the Charter nor the  
 Convention on the Rights of the Child 
  requires that the interests of affected children be considered under every provision of the  
 Act 
 :  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. If a statutory scheme provides an effective opportunity for considering the interests of any affected children, including those born Canada, such as is provided by subsection 25(1), they do not also have to be considered before the making of every decision which may adversely affect them. Hence, it was an error for the Applications Judge to read into the statutory provisions defining the scope of the PRRA officer's task a duty also to consider the interests of the adult respondents' Canadian-born children. 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, Chief Justice Lutfy noted the difference between the assessment of risk factors in an application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration and one for protection from removal: 
 
 
 
 3 In an application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration under section 25 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), the applicant's burden is to satisfy the decision-maker that there would be unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada. 
 
 
 
 4 In a pre-removal risk assessment under sections 97, 112 and 113 of the IRPA, protection may be afforded to a person who, upon removal from Canada to their country of nationality, would be subject to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment. 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  While recent amendments to section 25 of the  
 Act 
  have clarified that the risk factors considered in sections 96 and 97 should not be considered in H&C applications, but that other hardships may be considered, that amendment is not at issue in this case. The cases referred to above continue to describe the distinction between the two processes. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  Similarly in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, Justice Mandamin noted: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [38] 
  The two assessments are different, and the better opportunity to consider the BIOC is in the context of an H&C application. In this case, the applicants made an H&C application, which was refused by the same officer who refused the PRRA. The officer found that Rhea's best interests would be met by returning to India because treatment was available for her there. Judicial review was granted for the H&C decision upon finding that the officer failed to conduct an appropriate BIOC analysis and for other reasons (see file no. IMM-1750-12). 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  Although the officer was not required to conduct a full BIOC analysis in the context of the PRRA, he did engage in a partial analysis of the BIOC in determining that an IFA existed in Mumbai. 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  Dr Truong's letter indicated that "cancer outcomes and overall survival is well known to be higher in developed countries such as Canada where there is a network of excellent pre-hospital care (ie. EMS, ambulance), provision of supportive care (antibiotics and blood products), and excellent inpatient hospital services (diagnostic imaging and access to essential medications)". 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  Dr Truong also indicated: 
 
 
 
 The treatment of relapsed leukemia is  
 physically 
  and  
 psychologically 
  demanding on a young child. The chemotherapy is much more intensive and requires multiple clinic visits and long periods of hospitalization. The regime is so intense that rarely, a few children will die while on therapy. Rhea has had a  
 few 
  instances during the treatment where she has had some life threatening episodes and had to be admitted to the intensive care unit. The provision of timely and high quality care offered here has allowed her to recover from those episodes without any complications. 
 
 
 
 The successful treatment of children with cancer requires high quality medical care, the availability of specialists in oncology and other medical specialties, and a multidisciplinary team of personnel that includes nurses, pharmacists, dieticians and social workers to name a few. It requires access to diagnostic imaging services such as CT and MRI scanners and access to essential chemotherapeutic drugs, such as those that Rhea is currently receiving. [emphasis in original] 
 
 
 
 [42] 
  The Jiv Daya Report (India Pediatric Oncology Initiative Meeting) included information that described the obstacles to treatment for children with cancer in India. The report indicated that the overall cure rate in India varied between 10 and 25%, compared to 70% in the United States. The report also indicated that there were over 40,000 new cases of childhood cancer each year in India and 70% have advanced disease at diagnosis. There are only 55 practicing paediatric oncologists in all of India. 
 
 
 
 [43] 
  The report indicated that the barriers to treatment identified included the lack of infrastructure, insufficient staff, lack of training, economic restraints and other challenges related to the delivery of care, and that the common issue expressed was the constant influx of patients, inadequate beds to see them all and insufficient staff to treat them. 
 
 
 
 [44] 
  The evidence highlights that the treatment for relapsed ALL is specialised. The officer's conclusion that there was little evidence that medical treatment would not be available in Mumbai is not reasonable. 
 
 
 
 Was the officer's IFA finding reasonable? 
 
 
 
 [45] 
  The test for an IFA is well established and there is a high onus on the applicant to demonstrate that a proposed IFA is unreasonable:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. The two-pronged test for an IFA has been cited in many cases and was established in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, which continues to apply. 
 
 
 
 [46] 
  The test is: (1) the Board (or in this case, the officer) must be satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that there is no serious possibility of the claimant being persecuted in the proposed IFA; and, (2) conditions in the proposed IFA must be such that it would not be unreasonable, upon consideration of all the circumstances, including consideration of a claimant's personal circumstances, for the claimant to seek refuge there. 
 
 
 
 [47] 
  In the present case, the officer found that Mumbai offered a reasonable IFA because no one beyond the immediate area of the principal applicant's former factory would feel compelled to follow the fatwa, the applicant and his family would adapt to Mumbai, and Rhea would have access to treatment there. 
 
 
 
 [48] 
  For the reasons noted above, the finding that the applicants had provided little evidence that medical treatment would not be available in Mumbai is unreasonable. The evidence establishes the barriers to treatment in India and highlights that Rhea has been treated for relapsed ALL which requires specialised treatment and follow-up care. 
 
 
 
 [49] 
  Due to the personal circumstances of the applicant's family, particularly the needs of Rhea for access to prompt and high quality treatment and follow-up for ALL, the second branch of the IFA test has not been met. 
 
 
 
 Proposed Certified Question 
 
 
 
 [50] 
  The applicants proposed the following question for certification: 
 
 
 
 Do the principles of fairness dictate that a PRRA officer must, before arriving at his or her final determination on a PRRA application, when relying on evidence referred to in subsection 113 (a) of IRPA, which evidence the PRRA applicant could not rely upon in his or her PRRA application by operation of subsection 113 (a) of IRPA, disclose that said evidence to the PRRA applicant and afford him or her an opportunity to rebut that evidence. 
 
 
 
 [51] 
  The respondent has replied that the proposed question does not meet the test for certification as it is not a serious question of general importance that will be dispositive of the appeal. The question pertains to the disclosure of a particular country condition document, and therefore would not be a question of general importance:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. Moreover, the law is well settled that PRRA officers need not disclose public documents relied upon about country conditions and which were available and accessible at the time the submissions were made:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [52] 
  As noted above, the applicants were deemed to have been aware of the publicly accessible RIR and hence disclosure was not required. The applicants had also sought to adduce some new evidence about the fatwa, to which the officer attributed low weight. The question proposed for certification does not aptly capture the hypothetical situation faced by the applicants. In addition, its determination would not be dispositive. 
 
 
 
 [53] 
  No question is certified. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [54] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
 : 
 
 
 
 1. The application for judicial review is allowed and the PRRA should be remitted for consideration by a different officer; 
 
 
 
 2. No question is certified; and, 
 
 
 
 3. No costs are awarded. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: E. Joanne Oley/vnh 
 
 
 
 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 1. According to the PRRA officer's reasons, 'fatwa' is pluralized as 'fatawa'. 
 
 
 

