[1]
Reed, J.
: These applications deal yet again with the procedures and burden of proof that apply in applications brought pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
[see footnote 1]. Many aspects of the issues originally raised in the present applications have been settled, at least, insofar as the Trial Division is concerned. This is the result of decisions such as:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 171 (T.D.) affirmed (1995), 180 N.R. 323; 60 C.P.R.(3d) 501 (F.C.A.) (process claims are not claims which contain a claim for the medicine itself);
Eli Lilly and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 245 (F.C.T.D.) (process claims for intermediate substances are not claims for the medicine itself);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 58 (T.D.), affd. (1995), 193 N.R. 394 (F.C.A.) (composition or formulation claims are claims for the medicine itself).
[2]
These applications were among the earliest to be filed after the
Regulations
first came into effect: T-1898-93 was filed August 3, 1993; T-1964-93 was filed August 11, 1993. They were filed when counsel assumed that proceeding by way of an action was required. They were filed before it had been determined where the burden of proof lay and what avenues were open to an applicant to obtain information necessary to prove its case. What is in issue is the extent of the explanation that a respondent must provide in its notice of allegation in order for that notice to be justified, when there is virtually no other information on the record concerning that allegation. A second issue is whether the court should allow, at this stage, a reopening of the proceedings because both parties have been, as counsel put it, "overtaken by the evolving jurisprudence".
Legislative Framework
[3]
In 1993 the compulsory licensing system for medicines covered by patents was abolished. Patent holders, who had previously been granted patent protection for approximately ten years, were now granted protection for twenty years. Coincident therewith, provisions were enacted to facilitate the immediate entry of competitors into the market on the expiration of a patent [see footnote 2]. Section 55.2 was added to the
Patent Act
[see footnote 3]. Subsections (1) and (2) thereof
provide that certain activities will be deemed not to constitute patent infringement [see footnote 4]. These activities can be described, in general terms, as using a patented invention for government information purposes, related to the use or sale of a product, together with the manufacture and storage of the patented invention for immediate sale after the patent expires.
[4]
Before any drug is marketed it must receive the approval of the Minister of Health and Welfare. It must meet certain safety and other standards pursuant to the
Food and Drugs Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-27. A Notice of Compliance ("NOC") is issued when those standards are met [see footnote 5]. The period of time between an application for a NOC and its issuance can be lengthy. Subsections (1) and (2) of s. 55.2 of the
Patent Act
, then, allow a person who wishes to enter the market immediately on the expiration of a patent, to apply for a NOC and to manufacture and stockpile the invention before the expiry date of the patent.
[5]
During its passage through Parliament, authority to make regulations was added to s. 55.2 [see footnote 6]. The relevant statutory provision states that when a
patented invention
is used in accordance with subsection (1) or (2) of s. 55.2, regulations may be made to prevent the infringement of the patent:
"55.2(4) The Governor-in-Council may make such regulations as the Governor-in-Council considers necessary
for preventing the infringement of a patent by any person who
makes, constructs,
uses
, or sells
a patented invention
in accordance with subsection (1) or (2)
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, regulations
(a) respecting the conditions that must be fulfilled before a notice, certificate, permit or other document concerning any product to which a patent may relate may be issued to a patentee or other person under any Act of Parliament that regulates the manufacture, construction, use or sale of that product, in addition to any conditions provided for by or under that Act;" (underlining added)
[6]
The
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
("
Regulations
") were issued pursuant to that authority. Strangely, the regime established by those regulations is not predicated on a determination having been made that a
patented invention is being used
. Rather, it is triggered by a reference or comparison to a
drug for which a NOC has already been issued
. The relevant wording is "where a person files ... a submission for a notice of compliance in respect of a drug and
wishes to compare that drug with, or make a reference to, a drug that has been marketed in Canada
pursuant to a notice of compliance ..." [see footnote 7] then certain conditions established by the
Regulations
must be fulfilled.
[7]
Whether the failure to determine that a patented invention is being used, before imposing conditions with respect to the issuance of a notice of compliance, might give rise to an argument that the
Regulations
are ultra vires the regulation making authority, has not been canvassed. In any event, the conditions, which the person filing the new drug submission ("the second person") must meet are either to agree that the issuance of a NOC for its drug will not occur until the expiration of certain patents, or to file a notice of allegation stating that, for one of a number of reasons, the existence of the patents should not prevent the issue of a NOC [see footnote 8].
[8]
The patents, which the second person must address, are ones that have been listed with the Minister by the holder of the NOC (i.e., "the first person") for the drug to which comparison or reference has been made. There is no determination, at the time of the filing of this list, that the patented inventions covered by the patents are used in the drug for which the second person seeks a NOC. At the time of the filing of the patent list, the second person's new drug submission, normally, is not in existence. More importantly, there will be no determination that the second person is using the first person's patented inventions when it makes a reference or comparison to the first person's drug. The
Regulations
do not require such and the patents are those that the first person "wishes to have" listed and that the first person certifies
contain "a claim for the medicine itself or a claim for the use of the medicine" [see footnote 9].
[9]
When a second person refuses to agree that the NOC for the drug it seeks to market should not issue, until the expiration of the patents listed by the first person, and files instead a notice of allegation, it must serve a copy of that notice of allegation on the first person [see footnote 10]. The first person may then challenge that allegation by application in this court [see footnote 11].
[10]
The ensuing proceeding does not supplant the private right of a patent holder to bring an action for infringement once the drug is marketed: "the regulations nowhere create or abolish any right of action between the parties" [see footnote 12]. The assessment required under the
Regulations
is not intended to provide for a final determination as to whether infringement would exist if the drug, which is the subject of the second NOC, were marketed. The determination which the court makes is "of a limited or preliminary nature" [see footnote 13]:
"... [T]hey are proceedings to determine whether the Minister may issue a notice of compliance. That decision must turn on whether there are allegations by the generic company sufficiently substantiated to support a conclusion for administrative purposes (the issue of a notice of compliance) that the applicant's patent would not be infringed if the generic's product is put on the market." [See footnote 14]
[11]
As has been noted, the procedure set out in the
Regulations
"whose clear intention is to facilitate the protection of private commercial patent rights, have been grafted onto a regulatory scheme ... whose sole purpose is the protection of public health and safety"; and, "the union is not a happy one" [see footnote 15]. Not only have difficulties arisen because provisions to protect private law commercial rights have been inserted into a public law regulatory scheme, they have also arisen because of the failure to describe the procedure to be followed when a notice of allegation is challenged. The Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement, which accompanied the
Regulations
, describes the haste with which they were issued:
"... given the importance of quickly giving effect to the new statute [no explanation is given as to why such haste was necessary], consultations have not been undertaken on the text of these Regulations prior to their coming into force. Early notice was not given in the Federal Regulatory Plan. As this is a new regulation the government will consult on its implementation and make appropriate refinements if needed."
[12]
Appropriate refinements were needed from the beginning. The quantity of litigation, which has ensued from the lacuna in the
Regulations
, and its attendant cost for the respective pharmaceutical companies, and for the court, is most disconcerting.
Procedure - Burden of Proof
a) Procedure
[13]
It is now clear that an application pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
is not an action [see footnote 16]. It is an application for an order of prohibition against the Minister of Health and Welfare. The proceeding is one brought under s. 18(1)(b) and s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
[see footnote 17]. Therefore, Part V.1 of the
Federal Court Rules
(the 1600 Rules) govern the proceeding [see footnote 18]. The application of those
Rules
to a s. 6(1) application has proved awkward. The
Rules
are designed to operate when there is a decision to be taken or when a decision has already been taken by a tribunal, board or administrative decision maker. In such circumstances, there is a record by reference to which the decision maker will make or has made a decision. That record contains the relevant evidence with respect to the matter in issue and, when assessing the sufficiency of evidence, the court is normally restricted to the evidence on the record. In the case of a s. 6(1) application, the Minister of Health and Welfare has made and will make no decision respecting the likelihood of patent infringement. Indeed, when the Minister is requested by the Court Registrar to send up the record, or parts thereof, pursuant to rule 1612, I am given to understand he responds by indicating that he is in no position to determine what parts of the new drug submission are relevant to the proceeding and, in any event, much of the information in that submission is confidential.
[14]
As noted, when a notice of allegation is filed it must be served on the first person. The
Regulations
also require that a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation ("detailed statement") be provided by the second person. There is no requirement, in the
Regulations
, that this be served on the first person [see footnote 19]. The procedure set out in the
Regulations
seems to contemplate the commencement of an application by originating notice of motion, once the first person has received service of the second person's notice of allegation, and before the detailed statement is made available. Indeed, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R. 329 (F.C.A.) at 338, the Federal Court of Appeal indicated that it was unlikely a respondent would wish to provide information containing commercially confidential material to a competitor, i.e., its detailed statement, before a protective order had been put in place by the court. At the same time, however, the applicant is required, pursuant to rule 1602, to include in its originating notice of motion the grounds on which that motion is based together with a list of the documentary evidence to be used at the hearing [see footnote 20]. Also, rule 1603 requires the applicant to file, with its originating notice of motion, its affidavits in support of that motion.
[15]
This procedure would seem to require the first person (applicant) to make its case before it can possibly know the factual basis of the second person's (respondent's) allegation. In addition, while in most judicial review cases the court is confined to the material on the record, if I understand the jurisprudence correctly, the parties are not so confined in s. 6(1) applications. They are allowed to adduce original evidence, by filing affidavits in support and in response to the application. It seems that evidence is to be adduced in much the same way as in a motion for an interlocutory injunction [see footnote 21]. Lastly, while s. 18.4(2) of the
Federal Court Act
allows for converting applications for judicial review into actions, the extent to which this might be used in s. 6(1) applications remains unexplored. Such conversion was held not to be appropriate in the case of the allegation alleging non-infringement [see footnote 22] in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[16]
The application, then, is one contesting the adequacy of the allegation which has been made to the Minister. It is framed as an originating notice of motion, seeking judicial review not of a decision that has been made or will be made by the Minister but of the sufficiency of the allegation which has been put forward by the respondent. (In the present case the relevant assertion is that the drug the second person will market does not infringe the applicants' patents.) The record for the purpose of the application is the notice of allegation and the detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation, as well as those parts of the new drug submission, (e.g. those respecting the clinical composition of the drug) relevant to the particular application. Both the applicant and the respondent, however, may file affidavit material which adds original evidence to that which has been placed before the Minister.
b) Burden of Proof
[17]
The applicant has the burden of proof. There has been some confusion as to whether that burden is: (1) proving that the drug if marketed will infringe; (2) proving that the respondent has not proven that the drug will not infringe; or (3) proving that the evidence which has been provided by the respondent does not justify the allegation. The weight of the jurisprudence to which I have been referred has now settled on the last.
[18]
The burden that the applicant must meet is on the balance of probabilities. In meeting that burden the applicant is not entitled to make his case "out of the mouth of the respondent" [see footnote 23]. I do not understand the decisions in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.) to be relevant. In the first place, those decisions relate to common carriers. A presumption of liability exists if the carrier does not return goods to the shipper in the same condition as that in which they were received. I do not understand that jurisprudence to establish that merely because knowledge of certain facts is in the possession of one party, that party must disclose such. When a plaintiff has proven certain facts (the potatoes while under the control of a common carrier were frozen and redelivered in a spoiled condition), an inference may arise, which in the absence of any evidence from the defendant, will cause the plaintiff to win its case. But, the burden remains on a plaintiff, or on an applicant, to adduce sufficient evidence to raise such an inference so that, without anything more being said, it will win its case.
[19]
In some circumstances, statutory presumptions exist to assist the plaintiff in meeting the burden of proof which rests upon it. However, the presumption in s. 55.1 of the
Patent Act
is not one that is applicable to s. 6(1) applications, since it only applies to "an action for infringement of patent" [see footnote 24].
[20]
An argument was made by counsel that, in any event, the respondent bears the evidentiary burden. The evidentiary burden, in a case, is the evidence that a prosecutor (in a criminal trial) or a plaintiff (in a civil trial) need adduce before an accused or defendant, as the case may be, need adduce evidence in response. In the case of a criminal trial, the failure to meet this burden can lead to a directed verdict on the ground that there is insufficient evidence to go to the jury. In the case of a civil trial, the distinction between the legal burden and the evidentiary burden is not as significant since the evidentiary burden for a particular fact normally coincides with the legal burden [see footnote 25]. A failure to meet the evidentiary burden means, in a civil proceeding, that the plaintiff will lose its case without any evidence ever being called by the defendant. I do not understand the applicable rules to be any different with respect to an applicant in a s. 6(1) proceeding from those applicable in other types of legal proceedings. However, many judicial review applications require a heavier burden; in order to be successful the applicant must prove perversity, capriciousness, or acting without regard to the material on the record.
[21]
In summary, as I understand the existing jurisprudence, in a s. 6(1) application the burden of proof is on the applicant. The burden is not different from that which exists in other types of legal proceedings. The burden is on the balance of probabilities. The applicant must prove that the respondent's allegation is not justified.
Procedure In These Applications
[22]
In T-1964-93, four patents were listed on the relevant patent list. In T-1898-93, fifteen patents were listed on the relevant patent list. In both cases some of the listed patents have now expired; others will not expire until October of 2001 and September of 2006, in T-1964-93 and T-1898-93 respectively. The use of the word "respondent" in these reasons, in the case of T-1964-93 refers to Nu-Pharm Inc., in the case of T-1898-93 refers to Apotex Inc.
[23]
I will describe the procedure followed in T-1964-93. Apart from different dates, the procedure followed in T-1898-93 was essentially the same. The originating notice of motion was filed on August 11, 1993. This was in response to the service of the notice of allegation dated June 25, 1993. This was also before the respondent's detailed statement had been served or filed with the Minister.
[24]
The originating notice of motion identifies the owner of the four patents which were put in issue and the right of the two <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> applicants [one now being
Hoffmann-La Roche
] to assert rights thereunder. It states that the patents had been listed with the Minister of Health and Welfare on April 7, 1993, that a notice of allegation had been received and the applicants, therefore, were seeking an order of prohibition against the Minister pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
. The originating notice of motion does not comply with rule 1602, as it is now clear it must [see footnote 26]. It does not contain the grounds to be argued by the applicant. It does not contain a list of the documents to be relied upon. Nor were affidavits in support of the applicant's motion filed as required by rule 1603.
[25]
On November 12, 1993, the applicants filed a notice of motion to compel the respondent to serve a detailed statement or to have its notice of allegation struck out. A consent order to this effect issued on November 29, 1993. At that time, it was also agreed that a protective confidentiality order would be put in place, on consent, to be drafted by the parties. A protective order was finally agreed upon and issued on December 30, 1993. The detailed statement was filed and served on January 12, 1994. It was quite brief and stated, insofar as the only patent that remains in issue before me is concerned, that "no claim for the medicine would be infringed by the making and selling of ticlopidine hydrochloride tablets 50 mg" because the claims in the patents were only for certain dosage forms. It referred to s. 4(1) of the
Regulations
and the phrase "a claim for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine". It stated, in addition, that the respondent used a different composition from the applicant. It did not use any of the organic acids listed in the patent [see footnote 27]. This was identical to what had been asserted in its notice of allegation.
[26]
On April 26, 1994, the applicants filed a notice of motion to strike out the respondent's notice of allegation or to require the respondent to produce a further and better detailed statement. This was adjourned and a cross-motion was subsequently filed by the respondent to limit the patents on which the applicants might rely to patent claims that fell within the description in the
Regulations
of a "claim for the medicine itself or for the use of the medicine". These motions were adjourned several times
. On May 11, 1994, the motion to strike the allegation or require that the respondent produce a further and better detailed statement was reactivated. It asked among other things for "a detailed description of the pharmaceutical composition of the ticlopidine tablets" for which the respondent was seeking a NOC and for twenty of those tablets to be provided to the applicants for examination by them. The respondent renewed its cross-motion that the applicants be restricted to relying on claims in the patents which were claims for the medicine itself or for a use of the medicine.
[27]
On May 2, 1994, the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  became clear that the court had no authority to compel the production of evidence and that there is no oral or documentary discovery [see footnote 29]. The court cannot require, for example, that the respondent provide samples of the drug it proposes to market to the applicant (whether these can be required from the Minister if they form part of the record before him is another matter).
[28]
It is now clear that the court has no jurisdiction to strike a notice of allegation or a detailed statement [see footnote 30]. It has no jurisdiction to order the filing and service of a detailed statement or a further and better detailed statement [see footnote 31]. The notice of allegation and the detailed statement are not pleadings in this court but administrative documents filed with the Minister. The procedure applicable to judicial review applications is applicable. With respect to the respondents' interlocutory application to have the status of the patent claims, on which the applicants were relying, determined, it has been held that this type of application is inappropriate. The proceeding being one for judicial review, such interlocutory applications should be dealt with at the hearing of the judicial review application itself [see footnote 32].
[29]
In any event, on June 14, 1994, a consent order issued under which the respondent agreed to file its affidavit evidence by September 1, 1994. The applicants were then to file their affidavits on October 31, 1994. On November 23, 1994, a schedule for the disposition of the application was established by order of the court. This schedule was subsequently revised but the changes are not relevant for present purposes. It suffices to say that the applicants' application record was filed on June 30, 1995 and the respondent's on July 31, 1995. The application records of both parties were filed before the Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  composition or formulation claim could be said to be a claim for the medicine itself or for the use of the medicine.
[30]
Not only were the application records of both parties filed before the Federal Court of Appeal decided that composition or formulation claims were claims for the medicine itself, they were also filed after the decision of Mr. Justice Wetston in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [see footnote 34] but before that of Mr. Justice Noël in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  motions.
Notices of Allegation - Claims
in Issue - Analysis
Patent Number 1,176,170 (file T-1964-93)
[31]
In T-1964-93, as has been noted, the respondent stated in its notice of allegation, and in its subsequently filed detailed statement, that the use or sale of its drug would not infringe the applicants' patent because that patent covered a composition or formulation claim. It also asserted that in making its drug it did not use any of the organic acids which are listed in the relevant patent claim [see footnote 36]. Claim one of patent 1,176,170 claims an exclusive property in:
"A pharmaceutical composition comprising a pharmaceutically acceptable acid addition salt of a thienopyridine compound represented by the formula:
[See printed version]
wherein R is phenyl or benzyl, each optionally substituted on the phenyl ring with 1 to 3 halogen atoms, alkyl of 1-6 carbon atoms, alkoxy of 1-6 carbon atoms, hydroxy or nitro; R
1
is hydrogen, halogen, hydroxy or alkyl having 1-6 carbon atoms; R
2
is hydrogen or halogen; n is 1 or 2, and when n is 2, R
1
may have different meanings in each (CHR
1
) radical; and
at least one pharmaceutically acceptable, non-volatile organic acid which is ascorbic acid, glycolic acid, mandelic acid, malic acid, malonic acid, or tartaric acid
." (underlining added)
[32]
The applicants argue that even if the respondent's allegation justifies a finding of no literal infringement, this is not sufficient because there may be infringement of the substance of the patent. While the patent claim is very specific in its listing of the non-volatile organic acids, the relevant descriptive portion of the patent is broader:
"A pharmaceutically acceptable non-volatile acidic compound is one which is crystalline at room temperature and remains so throughout the range of temperatures normally encountered in the manufacture and storage of pharmaceutical compositions and has a pKa between 2-6. Such a compound may be inorganic or organic. Inorganic compounds would be represented by monobasic sodium phosphate and the like.
Representative of organic compounds are
ascorbic acid, malic acid, tartaric acid, glycolic acid, malonic acid, malic acid, maleic acid, fumaric acid, benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, mandelic acid, and the like. Of these, citric acid is preferred. Generally, the organic acid is present in an amount of 0.5-5.0% by weight.
. . . . .
"The invention is further illustrated by the following examples of the preparation of tablet and pill forms of ticlopidine HC1.
These examples are by no means intended to limit the scope of this invention but are given by way of illustration.
" (underlining added)
Patent 1,204,671 (file T-1898-93)
[33]
I turn then to application T-1898-93. The texts of the notice of allegation and that of the detailed statement again are identical. They focus primarily on the nature of the claims as being for dosage forms, not for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine [see footnote 37]. The only additional assertion is that the respondent "hereby undertakes that any tablets produced and sold by Apotex will not fall within the scope of the claim of patent 1,204,671 so that no claim would be infringed". Counsel for the respondent argues that this assertion can only be read as an assertion that the respondent does not use the weight percentages set out in the applicants' patent.
[34]
The patent in question relates to a controlled release drug containing naproxen or naproxen sodium. The claim in issue, claims an exclusive property in:
"1. A controlled release tablet for once-daily oral administration of about 500-1200 mg of naproxen or naproxen sodium, said tablet comprising a homogeneous matrix comprising:
about
4-9 weight percent of hydroxypropyl - methylcellulose having a number average molecular weight
in the range of from about
80,000 to about 130,000,
about
81-96 weight percent of naproxen or naproxen sodium,
0.1 to
about
2 weight percent of a pharmaceutically acceptable lubricating agent, and
0 to
about
8 weight percent of other pharmaceutically acceptable excipients." (underlining added)
[35]
Counsel for the applicants argues that even reading the patent as the respondent suggests does not support a finding that the allegation of non-infringement is justified. With respect to weight percentages, the patent claim itself describes what is claimed as being "about" or "in the range of". Thus, a factual allegation that the respondent's product does not fall within the specific weight percentages listed does not justify an allegation of non-infringement.
Analysis
[36]
The respondents rely on Mr. Justice Wetston's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [see footnote 38] and argue that the applications for the orders of prohibition should be dismissed because, as has been noted, the applicants' originating notices of motion do not accord with what has now been decided is the proper procedure for these applications. The notices contain no statement of the grounds on which the applicants are challenging the respondents' notices of allegation. No list of documents to be relied upon accompanied them. No affidavits in support of the applicants' motions accompanied the notices of motion. The applicants at no time sought production of those parts of the record from the Minister (the new drug submission), which would have allowed them to obtain information concerning the actual composition of the respondents' drugs. Since the applicants have adduced no evidence in support of their applications it is argued that those applications must be dismissed.
[37]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, Mr. Justice Wetston held that a statement by the respondents that their drug comprised "a lyophilised powder mixture containing
essentially
only doxorubicin hydrochloride and lactose in the specified ration by weight" was sufficient to justify non-infringement of a patent which claimed doxorubicin plus an inert excipient, which is often lactose, and a co-solubilizer. It was held that it was for the applicant to prove that the other component or components to the respondent's drug was a co-solubilizer and not just impurities having no co-solubilizing effect. The applicant had adduced evidence to show that the respondent's drug did contain 3% impurities which might be co-solubilizers.
[38]
Counsel for the applicants rely on the decision of Mr. Justice Noël in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [see footnote 39]. Counsel argues that that decision demonstrates that in a case where the respondent has adduced no factual evidence to support its allegation but merely makes a statement that the process it uses is different from the patent, the allegation of non-infringement has not been justified. The notice of allegation in that case was that "the process used in the manufacture of ketorolac tromethamine active ingredient in the Drug does not involve the decarboxylation of ...". According to the respondent, the patent described a process involving "the decarboxylation of [the relevant compound] ...". Mr. Justice Noël held that the respondent's assertion could not support a finding that the allegation of non-infringement was justified. He also held, however, that even if his conclusion in that regard were incorrect, a plain and unaided reading of the patent, together with the allegation, led him to conclude that the allegation was not justified. He found that the decarboxylation step was only one of several alternate steps covered by the patent claim. Thus an allegation of non-infringement of one step was not justification for an allegation of non-infringement of the whole claim.
[39]
It is important to keep in mind that in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, the applicant had sought from the Minister information concerning the respondent's drug. The Minister had not provided this and indeed the respondent had opposed the disclosure of any information by the Minister. In such circumstances, there may indeed be adverse inferences drawn from a skimpy notice of allegation and a skimpy detailed statement.
[40]
I understand the jurisprudence to establish, however, that the facts asserted in the respondent's allegation are to be taken as true, until disproved. Thus, providing there is some allegation of fact (or legal assertion), which if true would support a finding that the allegation is justified, and if that factual assertion is not disproved by the applicant, the allegation of non-infringement will be justified.
[41]
In the case of patent 1,176,170 (file T-1964-93), if the respondent does not use one of the acids listed in the claim, then it seems clear that there is no literal infringement of that claim. The fact asserted supports the allegation of non-infringement. As noted, counsel for the applicant argues, however, that a finding of non-infringement on the face of the claim is not sufficient; infringement of the substance of the patent may be occurring.
[42]
While Mr. Justice Noël, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , referred to the specifications of the patent, his decision that a finding of non-infringement was not justified relied wholly on the text of the relevant claim. It is trite that claims are to be read in the context of the patent as a whole and in a purposive manner. However, it is still the text of the claim that, as has often been said, alone defines the statutory monopoly:
"The function of the claims is to define clearly and with precision the monopoly claimed, so that others may know the exact boundaries of the area within which they will be trespassers ..." [See footnote 40]
In construing a claim, recourse to the rest of the specification is (1) permissible to assist in understanding the terms used in the claims; (2) unnecessary where the words are plain and unambiguous; (3) improper to vary the scope or ambit of the claims [see footnote 41]. In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision Mr. Justice Noël did not use the specifications to broaden the scope of the claims.
[43]
These proceedings are not infringement actions, nor are they actions for declarations of non-infringement. In keeping with the summary nature of the proceedings, in a situation such as the present, if the facts asserted by a respondent justify an allegation of non-infringement, insofar as the text of the relevant claim is concerned, then, the allegation is justified. The proceeding is a summary one not designed to replace an action between the parties. With respect to patent 1,176,170 (file T-1964-93), then, the respondent's statement that it does not use one of the organic acids listed in the relevant claim of the patent justifies the allegation of non-infringement.
[44]
In the case of patent 1,204,671 (file T-1898-93), however, there is no assertion of fact that could lead to a conclusion that the allegation of non-infringement is justified. Even if I accept counsel's interpretation of the allegation and find that it implicitly contains the assertion of fact suggested, the claim is framed in approximate terms. The implied assertion that the respondent's product does not fall within the specific range of weight percentages listed would not support the allegation of non-infringement. Also, an undertaking by the respondent not to infringe the applicants' patent is not an assertion of fact. It cannot support a finding that the allegation of non-infringement is justified.
Curative Procedural Measures -
Disposition of the Applications
[45]
Counsel for the applicants argues that to find against the applicants because they did not follow what is now known to be the correct procedure, would be to allow form to triumph over substance. He notes that the applicants repeatedly sought information from the respondents as to the composition of their drugs, even though they did not seek production of the relevant parts from the Minister of the new drug submission. When the applicants wrote to the respondents seeking their detailed statements, they stated that they did not consider "a mere statement that the intended composition of the product - will not infringe the patent" would be sufficient to satisfy the statutory requirements. They sought "a statement, setting out in detail the composition of your proposed product". Counsel argues that the procedure, which was followed was adopted at a time when it was unclear what the appropriate procedure was and where the burden of proof lay, and the applicants should not be disadvantaged thereby. It is argued that rule 6 of the
Federal Court Rules
provides that, in special circumstances, the court may by order dispense with compliance with any rule where it is in the interests of justice to do so. Rule 302(b) provides that non-compliance with the
Rules
shall not render a proceeding void, unless the court so directs, but such proceedings may be dealt with in such manner and upon such terms as the court thinks fit.
[46]
Counsel for the respondents argues that if I should find against his clients, I should allow the respondents to adduce further and better affidavit material to support their allegation. Rule 303 provides that the court may, at any stage of the proceedings, order any document to be amended in order to determine the real controversy [see footnote 42]. Alternatively counsel asks that any order which is given be expressed to be without prejudice to the respondents to file with the Minister another notice of allegation.
[47]
I am not persuaded that rules 6 and 320(b) are appropriate. What I am being asked to do is not to waive compliance with the rules but to substitute an alternate procedure (requesting information from the respondent) for the one required (obtaining the record from the Minister). Compliance with the rules has been waived in a significant way already, by not insisting on compliance, for example, with rules 1602 and 1603.
[48]
While I was initially attracted to the idea of allowing for the filing of further evidence, given the continually and quickly evolving nature of the jurisprudence in this area, I have decided, on reflection, it would be inappropriate to do so. I might have decided otherwise, had an application to expand the material before the court been made before argument on the hearing of the applications was essentially completed.
[49]
With respect to the second proposition, that the order of prohibition against the Minister should be expressed to be without prejudice to the respondent's right to file new notices of allegation, I do not think that option is open to me. Section 6(2) of the
Regulations
requires the issuing of an order of prohibition if the allegations are found not to be justified:
"The court
shall
make an order pursuant to subsection (1) [an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance until after the expiration of one or more of the patents that are the subject of an allegation(s)] ... if it finds that none of the allegations is justified." (emphasis added)
[50]
Section 55.2(5) of the
Patent Act
provides that s. 55.2 of the
Patent Act
as well as the
Regulations
made thereunder, prevail over any other Act of Parliament or set of regulations [see footnote 43]. Therefore, the mandatory nature of s. 6(2) of the
Regulations
would not seem to leave the option which is suggested open to me. In addition, the notice of allegation is part of the new drug submission which is before the Minister. It is not under the control of this court. Whether that document can be amended, or withdrawn, is a matter to be dealt with by the Minister in accordance with the rules normally applied to material filed as part of a new drug submission and in accordance with the rules normally applied to the withdrawal or substitution of the submission as a whole.
[51]
For the reasons given, an order of prohibition will issue with respect to file T-1898-93; an order will not issue with respect to T-1964-93.
Order accordingly.
Editor: David Weir/sg
Footnotes
1. SOR/93-133 promulgated March 12, 1993, issued under s. 55.2(4) of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4 as enacted by the
Patent Act Amendment Act
, 1992, S.C. 1993, c. 2, s. 4.
2. See:
Canada, House of Commons Debates
, November 17, 1992 at 13502; comments by the Honourable Mr. Pierre Blais, Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, in
Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Legislative Committee on Bill C-91
, December 1, 1992, at 8:27.
3. Supra, footnote 1.
4. "55.2(1) It is not an infringement of a patent for any person to make, construct, use or sell the patented invention solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of information required under any law of Canada, a province or a country other than Canada that regulates the manufacture, construction, use or sale of any product.
"(2) It is not an infringement of a patent for any person who makes, constructs, uses or sells a patented invention in accordance with subsection (1) to make, construct or use the invention, during the applicable period provided for by the regulations, for the manufacture and storage of articles intended for sale after the date on which the term of the patent expires."
5. Pursuant to s. C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
, enacted under the
Food and Drugs Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-27.
6. Compare s. 55.2 as it appeared at first reading in Bill C-91,
An Act to amend the Patent Act, to amend another Act in consequence thereof and to provide for other related matters
, 3rd Sess., 34th Parl., 1991-1992, cl. 4, and as was subsequently passed in the
Patent Act Amendment Act
, 1992, S.C. 1993, c. 2, s. 4.
7. Section 5(1) of the
Regulations
[emphasis added].
8. Subsection 5(1) of the
Regulations
:
"5(1) Where a person files or, before the coming into force of these Regulations, has filed a submission for a notice of compliance in respect of a drug and wishes to compare that drug with, or make a reference to, a drug that has been marketed in Canada pursuant to a notice of compliance issued to a first person in respect of which a patent list has been submitted, the person shall, in the submission, with respect to each patent on the patent list,
(a) state that the person accepts that the notice of compliance will not issue until the patent expires; or
(b) allege that
(i) the statement made by the first person pursuant to paragraph 4(2)(b) is false,
(ii) the patent has expired,
(iii) the patent is not valid, or
(iv) no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by that person of the drug for which the submission for the notice of compliance is filed."
9. Section 4 of the
Regulations
:
"4(1) A person who files, or before the coming into force of these Regulations has filed a submission for or has been issued, a notice of compliance in respect of a drug that contains a medicine may submit to the Minister a patent list.
"(2) A patent list submitted pursuant to subsection (1) must be certified by the person to be accurate, and must set out
(a) any Canadian patent that is owned by the person, or in respect of which the person has an exclusive licence or has obtained the consent of the owner of the patent for the inclusion of the patent on the patent list, that contains a claim for the medicine itself or a claim for the use of the medicine and that the person wishes to have included on the patent list;
(b) a statement that, in respect of each patent, the person applying for a notice of compliance is the owner, has an exclusive licence or has obtained the consent of the owner of the patent for the inclusion of the patent on the patent list;
(c) the date on which the term limited for the duration of each patent will expire pursuant to section 44 or 45 of the
Patent Act
; and
(d) the address in Canada for service on the person of any notice of an allegation referred to in paragraph 5(3)(b), or the name and address in Canada of another person on whom service may be made, with the same effect as if service had been made on the person.
"(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), a person submitting a patent list shall do so at the time the person files a submission for a notice of compliance.
"(4) Subject to subsection (5), a person who has already filed a submission for, or has been issued, a notice of compliance before the coming into force of these Regulations and who wishes to submit a patent list shall do so within 30 days after the day on which these Regulations come into force;
"(5) At any time after the date of filing of the submission for a notice of compliance, the first person may submit a patent list that includes, or amend an existing patent list to include, the information referred to in subsection (2) in respect of a patent that issued within the previous 30 days on the basis of an application filed before the date of filing of the submission."
10. Subsection 5(3) of the
Regulations
:
"5(3) Where a person makes an allegation pursuant to paragraph (1)(b) or subsection (2) the person shall
(a) provide a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegations; and
(b) serve a notice of the allegation on the first person and proof of such service on the Minister."
11. Subsection 6(1) of the
Regulations
:
"6(1) A first person may, within 45 days after being served with a notice of an allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b), apply to a court for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance until after the expiration of one or more of the patents that are the subject of an allegation."
12.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 209 (F.C.A.) at 217 [C.P.R.].
13. Ibid.
14. Id., at 216 [C.P.R.].
15.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 302 (F.C.A.) at 304 [C.P.R.].
16.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 329 (F.C.A.).
17. R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7.
18. Supra, footnote 16.
19. Supra, footnote 10.
20. Rule 1602 of the
Federal Court Rules
:
"1602(2) The applicant's notice of motion shall be dated and signed by the applicant, or the applicant's solicitor, and shall
. . . . .
(d) set out the grounds intended to be argued, including a reference to any statutory provision or rule to be relied on;
. . . . .
(g) list the documentary evidence to be used at the hearing."
21. Supra, footnote 16 at 337 [C.P.R.].
22. Supra, footnote 16 at 337 [C.P.R.].
23. Supra, footnote 15 at 320 [C.P.R.]. See also
Pharmacia Inc.
, infra footnote 26.
24. Supra, footnote 15 at 319 [C.P.R.].
25. Sopinka, Lederman, Bryant,
The Law of Evidence in Canada
(Butterworths, 1992) at 60ff esp. at 64, and at 130 ff.
26.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 328 (F.C.T.D.), affd. (1995), 191 N.R. 157 (F.C.A.).
27. The Detailed Statement asserts:
"Section 4(1) of the Regulations Limits the applicability of the Regulation to 'a drug that contains a medicine'. From this section it is clear that the word 'drug' can only mean dosage form and the word 'medicine' can only mean the active substance contained therein. Patent 1,176,170 has claims for certain dosage forms. It has no claims for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine. Hence, it is not possible for any such claim to be infringed.
"Furthermore, the claims of patent 1,176,170 are limited to compositions (dosage forms) containing an acid selected from ascorbic acid, benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, citric acid, fumaric acid, glycolic acid, mandelic acid, malic acid, malonic acid and tartaric acid. Nu-Pharm's ticlopidine hydrochloride tablets will not contain any of the said acids, and Nu-Pharm hereby so undertakes.
"Accordingly, the patent will not be infringed."
28. Supra, footnote 15.
29. See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
30. Supra, footnote 12.
31.
Bayer AG and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.A.);
Eli Lilly and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 145 (F.C.T.D.).
32. Supra, footnote 16.
33.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pages 96, 99 - 100 of the applicants' application record.
37. "With respect to patent 1,204,671 in particular, we note that the patent has claims only for particular dosage forms. Section 4(1) of the Regulation limits the applicability of the Regulation to 'a drug that contains a medicine'. From this section it is clear that the word 'drug' can only mean the dosage form and the word 'medicine' can only mean the active substance contained therein. In this case the 'drug' is naproxen tablets and the 'medicine' is naproxen. That the 'medicine' is naproxen is confirmed by your Form IV patent lists. Accordingly, patent 1,204,671 does not have claims for the medicine itself, nor does it even have claims for a drug itself, but only for a drug when formulated in accordance with a particular composition.
"Furthermore, Apotex Inc. hereby undertakes that any tablets produced and sold by Apotex will not fall within the scope of the claims of patent 1,204,671, so that no claim would be infringed."
38. Supra, footnote 26.
39. Supra, footnote 35 at 10-11 [of original].
40.
Electric and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 39.
41.
Hughes and Woodley on Patents
, (Butterworths, current to November 1995), § 18.
42. Rule 303 of the
Federal Court Rules
:
"303(1) For the purpose of determining the real question in controversy, or of correcting any defect or error, the court may, at any stage of a proceeding, and after giving all interested parties an opportunity to be heard, order any document in the matter to be amended or such terms as seem just, and in such manner as it may direct.
"(2) This Rule does not apply to a judgment or order."
43. "55.2(5) In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between
(a) this section or any regulation made under this section, and
(b) any Act of Parliament or any regulations made thereunder,
this section or the regulations made under this section shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict."
[End of document]