 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Can. v. Hong (2012), 404 F.T.R. 120 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. JA.054 
 
 
 
 Ministre de la Sécurité Publique et de la Protection Civile (demandeur) v. Siu Kwan Hong (défenderesse) 
 
 (IMM-2963-11; 2012 CF 84; 2012 FC 84) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) v. Hong 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Shore, J. 
 
 January 20, 2012. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 On an immigration detention review, Hong's proposed guarantor, in sworn testimony, admitted that he had been convicted of a criminal offence (permitting his premises to be used as a common bawdy house, s. 210(2)(c) of the Criminal Code). The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness sought to file the police report that led to the guarantor's conviction. The Board member of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Division, refused to accept filing of the report because it had not been translated into Mandarin. The member accepted the guarantor and ordered Hong's release. The Minister sought judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1795 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Deportation and exclusion of persons in Canada - Detention (incl. review or release) (incl. IRPA, ss. 54-61) - On an immigration detention review, Hong's proposed guarantor, in sworn testimony, admitted that he had been convicted of a criminal offence (permitting his premises to be used as a common bawdy house, s. 210(2)(c) of the Criminal Code) - The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness sought to file the police report that led to the guarantor's conviction - The Board member of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Division, refused to accept filing of the report because it had not been translated into Mandarin - The member accepted the guarantor and ordered Hong's release - The Federal Court allowed the Minister's application for judicial review - The member erred in law in refusing to admit into evidence a document that was drafted in the language of the proceeding before him - Mandarin was not one of the two official languages - The member could have required the interpreter who was present to translate the document - Examining the police report would have shown that the guarantor lacked the qualities required to be a guarantor and did not constitute a reasonable alternative to detention - An erroneous assessment of the ability and qualities of a proposed guarantor was a fatal error. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1856 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Immigration and Refugee Board (incl. Immigration Division and Immigration Appeal Division) - Evidence and proof - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1795 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 4087 
 
 Practice - Hearings - Translation of documents and decisions - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1795 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Michèle Joubert, for the applicant. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Montreal, Quebec, on January 19, 2012, by Shore, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following reasons for judgment on January 20, 2012. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 Preliminary 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Shore, J. 
  [Translation]: The Board member refused to admit into evidence documents that clearly show that the guarantor had been convicted, as owner of a place, of knowingly permitting the place or any part thereof to be let or used for the purposes of a common bawdy-house (paragraph 210(2)( 
 c 
 ) of the  
 Criminal 
   
 Code 
 ). 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  According to the case law, an erroneous assessment of the ability and qualities of a proposed guarantor results in a fatal error. 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Legal procedure 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Despite the fact that the respondent has returned to her country of origin, the case continued in Court for reasons of public interest and statutory interpretation ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). This is an application for leave and judicial review filed by the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
  (Act) of a decision by Board Member Otto Nupponen of the Immigration Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (panel or Immigration Division) dated May 4, 2011, ordering the release of the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  On March 6, 2007, the respondent tried to enter Canada as a visitor, but withdrew her application in view of the officer's doubts concerning her good faith. The respondent left on March 7, 2007. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  On June 13, 2010, the respondent again sought visitor's status, which was granted to her until June 24, 2010, on which date she was to leave Canada, but she did not do so. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  On April 19, 2011, the respondent was arrested by the Laval police in a massage parlour and was handed over to the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA), pursuant to section 55 of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
  (Act), given that she did not have a legal status in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  On April 20, 2011, the applicant claimed refugee protection in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  On April 21, 2011, and April 28, 2011, the respondent benefited from an initial detention review and a further detention review, in accordance with subsections 57(1) and 57(2) of the Act, respectively. 
 
 
 
 Transcript of the hearing of April 21, 2011, Exhibit A of the affidavit of Susan Bradley: Applicant's Record, 
 
 
 
 Order of Justice Shore, 2011 FC 532, para 6: Applicant's Record. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Following the hearing, the Board member ordered the respondent's release on certain conditions. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Counsel for the respondent advised the Immigration Division that Ms. Sin Fu would no longer be able to fulfil the conditions necessary for Ms. Hong's release. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  In his sworn testimony, Mr. Wong, a proposed guarantor, admitted that he had owned a massage parlour and had been convicted, as owner of a place, of knowingly permitting the place or any part thereof to be let or used for the purposes of a common bawdy-house (paragraph 210(2)( 
 c 
 ) of the  
 Criminal 
   
 Code 
 ). 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Following Mr. Wong's testimony, the Minister's representative wanted to file the police report concerning the events that led to Mr. Wong's conviction. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The Board member refused to accept filing of the police report on the ground that the report had not been translated into Mandarin, even though the requirement is, to the extent possible, to file documents in the language of the hearing, that is, in one of Canada's two official languages. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The Minister objected to the respondent's release on the ground that Mr. Wong did not have the qualities sought in a guarantor. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  However, the Board member accepted the guarantor. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Consequently, the Board member ordered the respondent's release, in return for payment by the guarantor, Mr. Wong, of the sum of $1,500, payable in cash. 
 
 
 
 Issue 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Did the Board member err in fact and in law? 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Board member erred in fact and in law by refusing to accept filing of the police report. Examining the report would have enabled him to verify that Mr. Wong did not have the qualities required to be a guarantor and that he did not constitute a reasonable alternative to detention. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Mandarin is not one of the two official languages. The Board member could, however, have required the interpreter present at the hearing to translate the document into Mandarin. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  In this regard, the  
 Immigration Division Rules 
  read as follows: 
 
 
 
 Language of documents 
 
 
 
 25. (1) All documents used at a proceeding must be in English or French or, if in another language, be provided with an English or French translation and a translator's declaration. 
 
 
 
 Language of Minister's documents 
 
 
 
 (2) If the Minister provides a document that is not in the language of the proceedings, the Minister must provide a translation and a translator's declaration. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The Board member erred in law by refusing to admit into evidence a document drafted in the language of the proceedings before him. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The panel made unreasonable errors of fact (erroneous finding of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner, paragraph 18.1(4)( 
 d 
 ) of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
 ) by refusing to admit into evidence the police report and the transcript of May 4, 2011, which showed that the guarantor had been convicted, as owner of a place, of knowingly permitting the place or any part thereof to be let or used for the purposes of a common bawdy-house (paragraph 210(2)( 
 c 
 ) of the  
 Criminal 
   
 Code 
 ). 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  Despite clear and convincing evidence to the contrary of the Board member's observation, the Board member found the guarantor to be credible and made a decision in breach of the requirements of paragraph 47(2)( 
 b) 
  of the  
 Regulations. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  According to the case law, an erroneous assessment of the ability and qualities of a proposed guarantor results in a fatal error. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  In view of the Board member's reasoning, his decision is set aside and the applicant's application for judicial review is allowed. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [26] 
   
 THE COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that 
  the application for judicial review is allowed. There is no question of general importance to be certified. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Sharon McCartney/vnh 
 
 
 

