[1]
Dubé, J.
: This motion, on behalf of the defendants, is for an order that the plaintiff's notice of motion, memorandum of fact and affidavit in support, all dated July 8, 1994, be struck out and/or set aside under rules 5, 302, 319, 332.1, 401, 409, 411, 419, 420, 421, 432.1 to 432.7, 473, 474 and 1027 of the
Federal Court Rules
.
[2]
At the outset, it should be pointed out that rule 419 applies only to actions and not to applications. The purpose of that rule is to strike out any pleadings in the course of an action [see footnote 1]. One cannot strike a notice of motion (which is not a pleading), but rather must argue against the motion at its hearing [see footnote 2]. The usual way to attack a motion is to appear in court on the date set for the hearing of the said motion and to present arguments as to why the motion has no merit and should be denied [see footnote 3].
[3]
In this instance, the plaintiff's motion under attack is one filed under rules 432.1 to 432.7 for summary judgment. The four-pronged motion seeks (1) to strike out the statement of defence, (2) to grant summary judgment in favour of plaintiff, (3) to condemn defendants to pay the sum of $73,623.40, and (4) to refer the counterclaim asserted by the defendants to arbitration in London. A date has been set by the Associate Chief Justice for the hearing of the plaintiff's motion in January of 1995.
[4]
The defendants seek to strike out the plaintiff's motion on the ground that it does not comply with the
Federal Court Rules
, it is an abuse of process and deprives the defendants of their legitimate right to reply to the motion in an informed manner. The defendants list nine separate grounds which would thus vitiate the plaintiff's motion and therefore claim that the said motion should be struck out now, without waiting for the January hearing.
[5]
It may very well be that the presiding judge hearing the plaintiff's motion will decide that it has so many short-falls that it ought to be dismissed for lack of merit. But, in my view, the
Federal Court Rules
do not provide for a preemptive attack on a motion to be heard at a later date. Allowing such motions would likely generate a plethora of motions attacking one another.
[6]
The new summary judgment rules (432.1 and following) [see footnote 4] provide that a plaintiff may, after the defendant has filed a defence, make a motion with supporting affidavit material
or other evidence
for summary judgment on all or part of the claim in the statement of claim. In response, the defendant must set out in affidavit material
or other evidence
specific facts showing that summary judgment ought not to be rendered on the ground that there is a genuine issue for trial.
[7]
In the instant case, the plaintiff has seen fit not to file an affidavit but to rely on "other evidence"; the defendants may govern themselves accordingly in their response and set out in affidavit material or other evidence specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.
[8]
The new summary judgment rules do not provide for a preliminary motion by the defendants to attack the plaintiff's motion. Obviously, if it turns out that the plaintiff cannot obtain summary judgment without an affidavit, then the presiding judge will decide accordingly.
[9]
As to the other grounds raised by the defendants for striking out the plaintiff's motion they also ought to be raised at the hearing of the motion.
[10]
Consequently, the instant motion must be denied with costs.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/dlr
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 64 F.T.R. 127 (T.D.).
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  al. and Novopharm Limited et al.
, supra;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  has filed a defence, or earlier with leave of the court, and at any time prior to the fixing of the time and date for trial, make a motion to a judge, with supporting affidavit material or other evidence, for summary judgment on all or part of the claim in the statement of claim."
Rule 432.2(1) "In response to affidavit material or other evidence supporting a motion for summary judgment, a responding party may not rest on the mere allegations or denials of the party's pleadings, but must set out, in affidavit material or other evidence, specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."
[End of document]