[1]
McKeown, J.
: The plaintiffs seek an interlocutory injunction to restrain the defendant until judgment is rendered by the court, from infringing Canada Trustco Mortgage Company (CTMC)'s registered trademarks, unfairly trading on the goodwill associated with CTMC's trademarks and falsely representing to customers that it is licensed by or affiliated with CTMC.
[2]
The defendant, Huron Shores Real Estate Inc., (Huron Shores) acknowledges that the trademarks in issue in these proceedings are the property of CTMC. CTMC had granted Huron Shores an exclusive right to use the CT Home Realty Franchise System in the Sarnia/Lambton area for a period of five years plus a renewal period at Huron Shores' option of a further five years. Approximately two years later the corporation related to CT Home Realty entered into a partnership agreement with Coldwell Banker Canada Partners to carry on the business of franchising residential real estate brokerages under the name Coldwell Banker Affiliates of Canada (New Coldwell Banker). All CT Home Realty franchisees, including Huron Shores, were invited to join New Coldwell Banker. Huron Shores refused. However, Huron Shores submits that the services to which it was entitled to under the franchise agreement deteriorated dramatically after the creation of New Coldwell Banker. Huron Shores alleges that this constituted a breach of the licence agreement, and ceased paying the service fee and providing income reports that are required by the franchise agreement. As a result of Huron Shores' actions, on June 8, 1994, CT Home Realty notified Huron Shores that it would terminate the agreement on July 13, 1994, if the defaults were not cured by that date. The defaults were not cured and the agreement was terminated effective July 14, 1994. CT Home Realty informed Huron Shores that it must discontinue use of the proprietary marks and any other material which Huron Shores was entitled to use while a franchisee of CT Home Realty. The plaintiffs submit that Huron Shores did not discontinue use of the proprietary marks and is using the trademark "Canada Trust" without the qualifying terms mandated by the franchise agreement. The plaintiffs submit that Huron Shores continue to represent to customers and potential customers that it is licensed by or affiliated with CTMC knowing that such representations are false.
[3]
The issue, as submitted by the plaintiffs, is that Huron Shores refused to abide by the terms of the franchise agreement and so the plaintiffs terminated the agreement in accordance with its provisions. Huron Shores submits that the issue is whether CTMC was justified in commencing this action after setting up the new franchise system with Coldwell Banker.
[4]
The test for granting an interlocutory injunction is not the question here. It is the usual test:
1. the applicants must show there is a serious issue to be tried, or that there is a  prima facie case;
2. the harm to the applicant, caused by the infringement, must be irreparable; that is, if the harm can be compensated, and the respondent is in a financial position to pay damages, an interlocutory injunction would not normally be granted;
3. the court must then consider the balance of convenience, including whether the respondent would suffer irreparable harm if the injunction were granted; and
4. where other factors appear to be evenly balanced, it is preferable to preserve the status quo (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (F.C.A.) (
Turbo
) at pp. 18-19 C.P.R., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321; 25 Admin. L.R. 20, at pp. 127-128 S.C.R.).
[5]
The plaintiffs take the position that this is a normal injunction case. CTMC and Huron Shores had a franchise agreement concerning the use of the trademarks included in the CT Home Realty Franchise System. Huron Shores stopped paying the franchise fees in 1993. After notifying Huron Shores, and after Huron Shores failed to take steps to rectify its breaches under the franchise agreement, in July 1993 CTMC terminated the agreement in accordance with the provisions thereof.
[6]
The plaintiffs take the position that they have established that there is a serious issue to be tried, and that there is a prima facie case of trademark infringement or passing off. There was no challenge to the validity of the trademarks referred to in the Notice of Motion. Huron Shores acknowledges that the trademarks are the property of CTMC. Furthermore, Huron Shores acknowledges that it received all the correspondence relating to the termination of the franchise agreement by CT Home Realty Network, including the notice that the franchise agreement would be terminated if Huron Shores did not rectify the breaches referred to in the termination notice.
[7]
Section 8(2)(b) of the franchise agreement provides that upon termination of the agreement the franchisee, Huron Shores, shall cease to be an authorized franchisee and shall "immediately discontinue the use of the Proprietary Marks, and any signs, stationary, other identifying marks or colours and any forms of advertising or promotional material which would suggest that the Franchisee is still a Franchisee of the Franchisor". The plaintiffs submit that this is sufficient information to justify granting the interlocutory injunction. The plaintiffs rely on the statement of Addy, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) at page 53:
"As to the merits and the events leading up to the notice of default and the notice of termination, the plaintiff's affidavit evidence discloses prima facie justifiable grounds for termination."
[8]
The plaintiffs further submit that the issues raised by Huron Shores in respect of the alleged breach of agreement are beyond the jurisdiction of this court and cite
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 475 (T.D.). The plaintiffs further state that, as a matter of trademark law, it is not necessary to consider the adequacy of damages as an alternative remedy or the balance of convenience where there exists a reasonably clear case of infringement of a registered trademark. See
Restaurants Le Biftèque Inc. et al. v. 2425-8923 Quebec Inc. et al.
(1994), 75 F.T.R. 317 (T.D.).
[9]
I am unable to agree that the serious issue to be considered here is simply whether the franchise agreement has been properly terminated by the plaintiffs. It is necessary to consider the matters raised by Huron Shores. Huron Shores submits that the plaintiffs, in seeking injunctive relief, must come to court with clean hands. The court must consider Huron Shores allegation of a breach of the agreement by the plaintiffs. Huron Shores commenced an action against the plaintiffs in the Ontario Court (General Division) for specific performance of the franchise agreement. In that action, Huron Shores also sought an abatement of any franchise fees, general damages in the amount of $500,000, aggravated damages in the amount of $200,000 and punitive and exemplary damages in the amount of $200,000.
[10]
Huron Shores submits that the action for specific performance is equivalent to an attack on the validity of the trademark. As stated by Heald, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 129, at p. 137 C.P.R.:
"I now return to the conclusion of the trial judge quoted on p. 902 ... that the unauthorized use of a registered trademark results, per se, in irreparable harm to the owner of the mark ... Here the validity of the respondent's mark is very much under attack and in issue in these proceedings. In my view, a determination of the merits which involve extensive evidence and contentious and disputed factors which address the vital question of the validity of the mark should not be decided at the interlocutory injunction stage. In such a situation a conclusion that mere infringement of a proprietary right in a trademark constitutes, of itself, irreparable harm is somewhat contradictory since it is the very 'proprietary right' which is at issue. When a court decides via an interlocutory injunction that an aggrieved party has 'proprietary rights in a trademark', that court is deciding the very issue which is to be determined at trial. In my view such a determination should not be made at an interlocutory stage where, as in this case, the question of validity is strenuously addressed by the parties."
[11]
In my view, in this case the question of whether the franchise agreement is still in effect is determinative of the plaintiffs' right to obtain the injunction sought. The franchise agreement is the subject of an action for specific performance. If Huron Shores is successful in its specific performance action, the question remains as to whether the franchise agreement has expired and whether there is a right of renewal. The plaintiffs have taken the position that the right of renewal does not exist, and have informed Huron Shores and all the other remaining franchisees who did not become part of New Coldwell Banker that their franchise agreements will not be renewed.
[12]
In my view, the serious issue is whether the action for specific performance will succeed. Furthermore, if it does succeed the issue of renewal will come into play since s. 9.1 of the agreement reads in part:
"Should the Franchisee wish to renew this Agreement on the expiry thereof for a like term on such terms and conditions as are contained in franchise agreements than being granted by the Franchisor, the Franchisee must give written notice to the Franchisor at least 120 days prior to the expiry thereof.
"The request to renew will not be refused unless there is good cause ..."
[13]
There is a conflict between the apparent right of the franchisee to renew unless there is good cause, and the provision that any renewal should be on such terms and conditions as are contained in the franchise agreements then being granted by the franchisor. The franchisor, i.e., the plaintiffs in this matter, take the position that they are not offering renewals, therefore the above quoted clause is of no issuance to Huron Shores.
[14]
I must also must take into consideration the "clean hands" argument or, as it is often put, "he who seeks equity must do equity". Huron Shores submits that in October 1993, there were 150 franchises and 150 corporate offices. There are now only five franchises. The plaintiffs are granting no renewals. Huron Shores submits that the plaintiffs are seeking to get out of their franchise and real estate business and if the interlocutory injunction is granted, the plaintiff would benefit from their breach of the contract in October 1993. This is a matter which should be determined by the Ontario Court but there is a serious issue to be tried.
[15]
The status quo is the proper solution to this application in my view. Accordingly, I am not prepared to grant the application for an interim injunction so long as the defendant, Huron Shores, pays 1½% of the franchisee's gross income for the period, or $3,000 in accordance with paragraph 4.8 of the franchise agreement. This amount shall be paid into a trust account as agreed upon between counsel for the plaintiffs and the defendant. In the event they are unable to agree on a satisfactory trust account counsel may speak to me.
[16]
The motion is dismissed without prejudice to the plaintiffs' right to bring the matter back upon three days notice in the event that the defendant Huron Shores fails to make the foregoing payment and otherwise perform its obligations under the franchise agreement.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/dlr
[End of document]