 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 777)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Annis, J.
June 23, 2015.
Counsel:
Mark Rosenblatt, for the applicant, Shuangying Xu;
Nicholas Dodokin, for the respondent, The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
Solicitors of Record:
Mark E. Rosenblatt, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant, Shuangying Xu;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent, The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Annis, J.
: Pursuant to section 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA or the Act], the applicant is seeking judicial review of a decision by a Refugee Protection Division [then RPD or the Board Member] that the applicant is not a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection in the meaning of sections 96 and 97(1) of the Act.
[2]
For the reasons that follow, the application is dismissed.
II.
Background
[3]
The applicant is a citizen of the People's Republic of China [China]. In August 2011, the applicant alleges that her sister came to her home and told her that she was a Falun Gong practitioner and was fleeing from a raid by the Public Security Bureau [PSB]. The applicant's sister asked to stay with her and the applicant agreed. The sisters lived on the same street in Teiling City, Liaoning Province and the applicant indicated at the hearing that their homes were a 30- or 40-minute drive apart.
[4]
The applicant's sister hid at her home from August 27, 2011 until September 20, 2011, during which time the applicant did not allow her sister to use the home phone or leave the apartment. The applicant alleged at the hearing that, at her sister's urging, she called her sister's husband from a public phone and he tried to contact the leader of her sister's Falun Gong group, but to no avail.
[5]
On September 20, 2011, the applicant was informed by her neighbour that the PSB had come to her house, arrested her sister, and searched and sealed the property. The applicant alleges that the neighbour said the PSB had inquired about her and indicated that they strongly suspected that she was also a member of an underground Falun Gong group or otherwise associated with Falun Gong practitioners. Fearing arrest, the applicant did not go home and called her parents to tell them what had happened. Her parents directed her to go hide at her maternal uncle's home, which she did.
[6]
Later that day, the PSB went to the home of the applicant's parents to arrest her on the basis that she harboured an illegal Falun Gong activist. The PSB searched the home, interrogated her parents, and warned them that they would face legal consequences if they concealed or harboured the applicant. The PSB returned to the parents' home the next day and issued an arrest summons for the applicant.
[7]
Before this point, the applicant had considered going to the police to explain the situation. However, after discussing the situation with her family members, the applicant decided it was too risky to approach the PSB since they had already arrested her sister, sealed her home and issued the arrest summons against her. She remained in hiding until she was able to leave China with the help of a smuggler. She arrived in Canada on December 14, 2011 and applied for refugee protection in January 2012.
[8]
After coming to Canada, the applicant alleges that she felt unwell and was under "mental pressure." She decided to start practicing Falun Gong on May 13, 2012 since her sister had told her it was good for health. She appeared in public supporting Falun Gong in antigovernment protests.
III.
Impugned Decision
[9]
The RPD acknowledged that the objective documentary evidence shows that anyone who supports the activities of Falun Gong practitioners by providing a safe place to hide is at risk in China, since these activities are perceived as promoting an illegal activity. The RPD also noted that there are reports of such persons facing fines, threats and harassment even though they are not Falun Gong practitioners themselves.
[10]
However, the RPD found that there was no credible basis for the applicant's claim based on the following adverse inferences:
• The applicant was could not provide details on a number of items in her Personal Information Form [PIF] until prompted by the Board Member with specific questions;
• The applicant testified that her sister asked her to contact her sister's husband and asked him to find out from the Falun Gong group leader what happened to the other members but this was not mentioned in the PIF, which the RPD found to be an important omission because such activity could have exposed her to greater risk of discovery;
• The applicant testified that her sister's home was about a 30 or 40 minute drive from her own, which the RPD rejected as being implausible since their addresses were on the same street and the same district, the difference in the building numbers being only 30-1-1 and 25-4;
• In her testimony, the applicant talked about the conversation with her neighbour on September 20, 2011 but omitted that the PSB told the neighbour that they strongly suspected the applicant of being a member or otherwise associated with Falun Gong;
• The applicant testified that she thought her sister would be safe in her home and explained that there was nowhere else to go. Yet, the RPD noted that when it was alleged that she was wanted by the PSB, she asked her parents and then went into hiding at the home of a far more distant relative, a maternal uncle. The RPD found it implausible that they would do nothing since it is well-known in China that the authorities can and do punish family members of wanted persons and the most obvious place to look for a wanted person would be the homes of their immediate family members;
• The applicant testified that the PSB has continued to look for her at her parents' home, but that nothing has happened to her parents or her sister's husband. The RPD drew a negative inference from the lack of negative treatment toward her family when she alleged that she may be subject to extreme tactics by the PSB;
• Whereas the PIF stated that the PSB had been seeking to arrest her since September 20, 2011, in the applicant's CIC claim form there was a handwritten notation, with the applicant's signature beneath it, stating that the PSB wanted to arrest her since November 20, 2011. The RPD rejected her explanation that the notation was inaccurate and had never been interpreted back to her before she signed it; and
• The RPD found that there was no mention of the fact that her sister had been arrested in the CIC claim form.
[11]
In the alternative, the RPD found that, on a balance of probabilities, if the applicant is wanted by the Chinese authorities, it is because she violated a law of general application and not because she holds a particular belief or opposes government policies. This is not a ground to claim protection as a Convention refugee. Further, the RPD found that the sanctions that could be imposed on her for this contravention fall short of establishing that she would be subject to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment or risk of torture.
[12]
The RPD gave little weight to the applicant's documentary evidence (an arrest summons issued for her by the Chinese authorities (dated September 21, 2011), a notice to the arrested person's family regarding her sister, and a prison visiting card for her sister's husband). The Member concluded they were likely to be fraudulent based on his adverse credibility findings and the documentary evidence showing that fraudulent documents are readily available and often used by refugee claimants from China. The concerns are such that officials indicated that personal documents cannot be trusted in China and are assumed to be fraudulent unless proven otherwise.
[13]
Regarding the
sur place
claim, the RPD found that she did not have any medical documents to corroborate the health problems that she claims motivated her to become a Falun Gong practitioner. He drew a negative inference against her credibility, because of inconsistent answers that she had not suffered mental pressure while in China, but subsequently admitting that she had during her divorce proceedings in 2011, and that she did not provided any corroborative evidence from a medical practitioner, despite corroborating other areas of her testimony and being represented by experienced counsel.
[14]
The RPD noted other concerns, such as the applicant providing conflicting dates for when she decided to join Falun Gong (May 13, 2012 versus May 23, 2013) in circumstances that lack credibility. The RPD found that pictures of the applicant participating in Falun Gong activities in Canada did not sufficiently corroborate that she actually is or ever was a genuine Falun Gong practitioner. On this basis, the RPD concluded that the applicant had participated in Falun Going activities and publications to bolster a
sur place
claim, as it would be "unreasonable for [the applicant] to put herself at risk before she knew if her refugee claim would be successful", citing Federal Court jurisprudence to that effect.
IV.
Issues
[15]
The following issues arise in this application:
1. Did the RPD err in its assessment of the applicant's credibility in regard to her narrative of risk and her
sur place
claim?
2. Did the RPD err in its conclusion that the applicant had violated a law of general application and her risk of harm did not demonstrate that she would be subject to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment or risk of torture?
V.
Standard of Review
[16]
Both of the issues raised in this application relate to the RPD's interpretation and weighing the evidence, including its conclusions about the applicant's credibility. It is well-established that the RPD is entitled to deference in such matters and that the standard of reasonableness applies (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (FCA)).
VI.
Analysis
[17]
The applicant submits that the RPD was overzealous in its assessment of the applicant's credibility and undertook a microscopic examination of the evidence, which is contrary to the presumption of truthfulness that applies to the applicant's sworn testimony (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA)).
[18]
The Court agrees that in some respects there appears to have been a tendency by the RPD to be overly critical of the applicant, particularly on issues of little materiality to the case. For example, on the face of the transcript, the Board Member's criticisms of the applicant not providing details without prompting from the Board Member is questionable. Similarly there were dubious criticisms with respect to misstatement of dates, immaterial omissions in the PIF, the distance between the sisters' residences, speculation on possible treatment of her parents and the translation of the information on her sister's arrest.
[19]
On the other hand, with respect to some significant issues concerning her narrative of risk and the
sur place
claim, the credibility shortcomings of the applicant can be sustained. An important foundation for harbouring her sister is that they had no alternative despite the serious risk of severe repercussions to her and that it would be an obvious first place for the authorities to search for her sister. Yet when she decided to flee, on her parents' advice, she moved to a distant place to live with a maternal uncle. This appears to have been the most appropriate and obvious place where her sister could seek refuge given the seriousness of her predicament and the known risk to family members who harboured her.
[20]
The Board Member was also entitled to question the credibility of the applicant when in recounting her narrative involving her neighbour, she omitted the critical evidence that the neighbour had allegedly been told by the PSB that they strongly suspected that the applicant was also a member of the underground Falun Gong organization or was otherwise associated with the Falun Going practitioners. This evidence from an unknown source allegedly provides the basis for her arrest summons that precipitated her flight to Canada and her claim that if returned she would be arrested as an adherent of Falun Gong, and not for merely harboring her sister. The two arrest warrants cited different provisions of the law that were breached, it would appear that the applicant was not charged with the same offence as her sister who was an adherent of Falun Gong.
[21]
There is also sufficient evidence to support the Board Member's concerns about the applicant's credibility regarding her
sur place
claim. The evidence of the applicant's grounds for becoming an adherent of Falun Gong bears little weight. Vague undocumented mental health problems, uncorroborated in any fashion although a resident of Canada, coming after inconsistent evidence of not having similar mental pressures in China during her marital difficulties and subsequent divorce provide little support to join a religion. The Member is also entitled to point out that the applicant has attempted to carefully document and corroborate other areas of her evidence and was represented by experienced immigration counsel.
[22]
In this latter regard, I agree that the concept of joining Falun Gong religion and participating publicly in anti-government protests could be seen as unwise in the face of a pending RPD hearing and therefore motivated with the view to create a risk that otherwise did not exist upon her return to China.
[23]
The applicant's evidence as to the date that she joined Falun Gong also raises serious issues of the applicant's credibility. When discussing the evidence of her participating in anti-government protests and why she was not dressed in the similar clothing as the other adherents, she explained that she had just officially joined that day, and specifically remembered the protest event that occurred that year, in May 2013. Yet she claimed in other testimony that she joined in May 2012, which was allegedly supported by evidence from other adherents. The two versions of when she joined Falun Gong, I find irreconcilable.
[24]
It is trite law that the Court owes considerable deference to the Board Member, particularly on matters of credibility. Credibility is squarely within the domain of administrative tribunals, particularly where, as in this matter, the Board Member has the advantage of hearing and observing the applicant. The Court may only interfere when such findings are made in a manner that was perverse, capricious or made without regard to the material before the tribunal. Where evidence of the claimant's credibility difficulties on important issues arises, even acknowledging problems with the Board Member's assessments in other areas, the high administrative law threshold for the Court's intervention in is not met.
[25]
As noted by Justice Gleason in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "contradictions in the refugee claimant's own evidence will usually afford the RPD a reasonable basis for finding the claimant to lack credibility, and, if this finding is reasonable, the rejection of the entire refuge claim will not be interfered with by the Court" (citations omitted).
[26]
The adverse credibility findings against the claimant lead to the dismissal of the applicant's
sur place
claim. They also support the RPD's alternate conclusion that her return to China presents only a generalized risk pursuant to section 97 and does not result in her being subject to cruel and unusual treatment, or punishment or risk of torture.
[27]
Her allegations of being subject to arrest and imprisonment because she is suspected of being a member of the Falun Gong are not supported by her own evidence that when the PSB went to her parent's home, it was to arrest her on the basis that she harboured an illegal Falun Gong activist. Similarly, her inconsistent omission to state in her testimony that her neighbour advised that she was strongly suspected of being a member of the Falun Gong, supports the conclusion that she would not receive the same severe treatment as her sister for being merely an adherent of the religion.
[28]
The Court concludes that the decision of the RPD falls within the range of reasonable acceptable outcomes and is justified by reasons that are transparent and intelligible on the facts and the law.
VII.
Conclusion
[29]
Accordingly, the application is dismissed. No questions were proposed for certification and none are certified.
JUDGMENT
[30]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application is dismissed and no questions are certified for appeal.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Annis
[Traduction]: En application du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la LIPR ou la Loi), la demanderesse sollicite le contrôle judiciaire d'une décision par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés (alors la SPR ou le commissaire) a conclu que la demanderesse n'est ni une réfugiée au sens de la Convention ni une personne à protéger au sens de l'article 96 et du paragraphe 97(1) de la Loi.
[2]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, la demande est rejetée.
II.
Contexte
[3]
La demanderesse est citoyenne de la République populaire de Chine (la Chine). En août 2011, la demanderesse allègue que sa sœur s'est présentée chez elle et lui a dit qu'elle était une adepte du Falun Gong et qu'elle venait de fuir un raid mené par le Bureau de la sécurité publique (le BSP). La sœur de la demanderesse a demandé si elle pouvait rester et la demanderesse a accepté. Les sœurs résidaient sur la même rue dans la ville de Teiling, dans la province du Liaoning, et la demanderesse a indiqué à l'audience que leurs résidences étaient situées à 30 ou 40 minutes de route l'une de l'autre.
[4]
La sœur de la demanderesse s'est cachée chez cette dernière du 27 août 2011 au 20 septembre 2011, période pendant laquelle la demanderesse n'a pas permis à sa sœur d'utiliser le téléphone ou de quitter l'appartement. La demanderesse a allégué, à l'audience, qu'à la demande de sa sœur, elle a appelé le mari de cette dernière d'un téléphone public et que celui-ci a essayé de communiquer avec le leader du groupe du Falun Gong dont faisait partie sa sœur, mais sans résultat.
[5]
Le 20 septembre 2011, la demanderesse a été informée par sa voisine que le BSP s'était présenté chez elle, avait arrêté sa sœur, ainsi que fouillé et isolé la propriété. La demanderesse allègue que la voisine a dit que le BSP avait posé des questions à son sujet et soupçonnait fortement qu'elle était membre d'un groupe clandestin comme le Falun Gong ou autrement associée avec des adeptes de ce groupe. Craignant d'être arrêtée, la demanderesse n'est pas rentrée chez elle et a appelé ses parents pour leur raconter ce qui s'était passé. Ses parents lui ont demandé d'aller se cacher chez son oncle maternel, ce qu'elle a fait.
[6]
Plus tard le même jour, le BSP s'est rendu au domicile des parents de la demanderesse pour procéder à l'arrestation de celle-ci sur le fondement qu'elle avait hébergé une activiste illégale du Falun Gong. Le BSP a fouillé la résidence, interrogé ses parents, et les a avertis qu'ils subiraient des sanctions légales s'ils gardaient en secret ou hébergeaient la demanderesse. Le BSP est retourné au domicile des parents le lendemain et a délivré une assignation assortie d'un mandat d'arrestation contre la demanderesse.
[7]
Avant ce moment, la demanderesse avait pensé se rendre à la police pour expliquer la situation. Cependant, après avoir discuté de la situation avec des membres de sa famille, la demanderesse a décidé que c'était trop risqué de s'adresser au BSP étant donné qu'il avait déjà arrêté sa sœur, isolé son appartement et délivré une assignation assortie d'un mandat d'arrestation contre elle. Elle est restée cachée jusqu'à ce qu'elle puisse quitter la Chine avec l'aide d'un passeur. Elle est arrivée au Canada le 14 décembre 2011 et a présenté une demande d'asile en janvier 2012.
[8]
Après son arrivée au Canada, la demanderesse affirme qu'elle ne se sentait pas bien et subissait de la « pression mentale ». Elle a décidé de commencer à pratiquer le Falun Gong le 13 mai 2012 étant donné que sa sœur lui avait dit que cette pratique était bonne pour la santé. Elle s'est montrée en public à l'appui du Falun Gong dans des protestations antigouvernementales.
III.
Décision contestée
[9]
La SPR a reconnu que la preuve documentaire objective révèle que les personnes qui appuient les activités des adeptes du Falun Gong en offrant un endroit sûr où se cacher courent un risque en Chine, étant donné que ces activités sont perçues comme faisant la promotion d'une activité illégale. La SPR a également indiqué qu'on trouve des rapports sur ces personnes qui font l'objet d'amendes, de menaces et de harcèlement même si elles ne sont pas des adeptes elles-mêmes du Falun Gong.
[10]
Cependant, la SPR a conclu que la demande de la demanderesse ne reposait sur aucun fondement crédible selon les conclusions défavorables suivantes:
• La demanderesse n'a pas été en mesure de fournir des détails sur un certain nombre de points figurant dans son Formulaire de renseignements personnels (le FRP) jusqu'à ce que le commissaire la pousse à le faire en lui posant des questions précises;
• La demanderesse a témoigné que sa sœur lui avait demandé de communiquer avec son mari pour qu'il demande au leader du groupe du Falun Gong ce qui était arrivé aux autres membres, mais cela ne figurait pas dans son FRP, ce que la SPR a considéré comme une omission importante puisqu'une telle communication aurait pu l'exposer à un plus grand risque d'être découverte;
• La demanderesse a témoigné que la résidence de sa sœur était située à 30 ou 40 minutes de route de chez elle, ce que la SPR a jugé invraisemblable puisque leurs adresses indiquaient qu'elles habitaient sur la même rue et dans le même district, la différence en les numéros d'appartement étant seulement 30-1-1 et 25-4;
• Dans son témoignage, la demanderesse a parlé de sa conversation du 20 septembre 2011 avec la voisine, mais elle n'a pas mentionné que le BSP avait dit à la voisine qu'il soupçonnait fortement qu'elle était membre du Falun Gong ou autrement associée à celui-ci;
• La demanderesse a témoigné qu'elle pensait que sa sœur serait en sécurité chez elle et a expliqué qu'elle n'avait aucun autre endroit où aller. Toutefois, la SPR a fait remarquer que, selon la demanderesse, lorsqu'elle était recherchée par le BSP, elle s'est renseignée auprès de ses parents et est ensuite allée se cacher chez un membre de la famille beaucoup plus éloigné, un oncle maternel. La SPR a conclu qu'il était invraisemblable que le BSP n'ait rien fait, étant donné qu'il est bien connu en Chine que les autorités ont le pouvoir de punir des membres de la famille de personnes recherchées, et que les résidences des membres de leur famille immédiate sont les premiers endroits où elles mènent leurs recherches;
• La demanderesse a témoigné que le BSP a continué à la chercher au domicile de ses parents, mais que rien n'est arrivé à ses parents ou au mari de sa sœur. La SPR a tiré une conclusion défavorable en raison du manque de mauvais traitement envers sa famille lorsqu'elle a affirmé qu'elle était susceptible d'être sujette à des tactiques extrêmes de la part du BSP;
• Tandis que le FRP indiquait que le BSP cherchait à l'arrêter depuis le 20 septembre 2011, dans le formulaire de demande à CIC de la demanderesse se trouvait une note manuscrite, accompagnée de la signature de la demanderesse en dessous, indiquant que le BSP cherchait à l'arrêter depuis le 20 novembre 2011. La SPR a rejeté son explication selon laquelle la note était inexacte et ne lui avait jamais été traduite de vive voix avant qu'elle ne la signe;
• La SPR a conclu qu'il n'y avait aucune mention du fait que sa sœur avait été arrêtée dans le formulaire de demande à CIC.
[11]
Subsidiairement, la SPR a conclu, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que si la demanderesse est recherchée par les autorités chinoises, c'est parce qu'elle a violé une loi d'application générale et non parce qu'elle professe une croyance particulière ou s'oppose aux politiques du gouvernement. Il ne s'agit pas d'un motif permettant d'obtenir l'asile à titre de réfugié au sens de la Convention. En outre, la SPR a conclu que les sanctions qui pourraient lui être infligées pour cette contravention ne permettent pas d'établir qu'elle serait exposée au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités, ou à un risque de torture.
[12]
La SPR a accordé peu d'importance aux éléments de la preuve documentaire de la demanderesse (une assignation assortie d'un mandat d'arrestation délivrée contre elle par les autorités chinoises datée du 21 septembre 2011); un avis remis à la famille de la personne arrêtée concernant sa sœur; et une carte de visiteur de prison du mari de sa sœur). Le commissaire a conclu qu'ils étaient probablement faux compte tenu de ses conclusions de crédibilité défavorables et de la preuve documentaire révélant que des documents frauduleux sont facilement accessibles et souvent utilisés par des demandeurs d'asile chinois. Les préoccupations sont telles que des agents responsables ont indiqué qu'en Chine on ne peut faire confiance aux documents personnels et que ceux-ci sont présumés faux jusqu'à preuve du contraire.
[13]
Concernant la demande d'asile sur place, la SPR a conclu que la demanderesse ne disposait pas de documents médicaux pour corroborer les problèmes de santé qui, selon elle, avaient justifié qu'elle devienne une adepte du Falun Gong. Le commissaire a tiré une conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité de la demanderesse en raison de réponses incohérentes selon lesquelles elle a affirmé qu'elle n'avait pas souffert de pression mentale en Chine, mais ensuite a affirmé qu'elle en avait subie durant ses procédures de divorce en 2011, et du fait qu'elle n'a pas fourni de preuve corroborante de la part d'un médecin, malgré que d'autres aspects de son témoignage aient été corroborés et qu'elle était représentée par un avocat d'expérience.
[14]
La SPR a exprimé d'autres préoccupations, telles que les différentes dates fournies par la demanderesse quant au moment où elle a décidé de se joindre au Falun Gong (le 13 mai 2012 par opposition au 23 mai 2013) dans des circonstances qui manquent de crédibilité. La SPR a conclu que des photographies de la demanderesse participant à des activités du Falun Gong au Canada étaient insuffisantes pour corroborer son allégation voulant qu'elle soit ou ait déjà été une véritable adepte du Falun Gong. Sur ce fondement, la SPR a conclu que la demanderesse avait participé à des activités et publications du Falun Gong pour donner plus de poids à sa demande d'asile sur place, puisqu'il était [traduction] « déraisonnable que [la demanderesse] s'expose à un risque avant qu'elle ne sache si sa demande d'asile serait accueillie », citant la jurisprudence de la Cour fédérale à cet égard.
IV.
Questions en litige
[15]
La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire soulève les questions en litige suivantes:
1. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur dans son appréciation de la crédibilité de la demanderesse en ce qui concerne son exposé des risques et sa demande sur place?
2. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la demanderesse avait violé une loi d'application générale et que son risque de préjudice ne démontrait pas qu'elle serait exposée au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités, ou à un risque de torture?
V.
Norme de contrôle
[16]
Les deux questions en litige dans la présente demande portent sur l'interprétation et l'appréciation de la preuve par la SPR, y compris ses conclusions au sujet de la crédibilité de la demanderesse. Il est bien établi que la SPR a droit à la déférence à l'égard de telles questions et que la norme de la raisonnabilité s'applique (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (CAF)).
VI.
Analyse
[17]
La demanderesse soutient que la SPR a fait preuve d'un excès de zèle dans l'appréciation de sa crédibilité et qu'elle s'est attardée à une analyse microscopique de la preuve, ce qui est contraire à la présomption de véracité qui s'applique au témoignage sous serment de la demanderesse (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF)).
[18]
La Cour convient que la SPR semble avoir eu tendance à certains égards à être trop critique envers la demanderesse, en particulier à l'égard de questions peu importantes dans l'affaire. Par exemple, à la lecture de la transcription, les critiques du commissaire envers la demanderesse pour ne pas avoir fourni de détails sans l'insistance du commissaire sont discutables. De même, on trouve des critiques contestables concernant la déclaration erronée de dates, des omissions sans conséquence dans le FRP, la distance entre les résidences des sœurs, des suppositions quant à un traitement possible pour ses parents et la traduction des renseignements figurant dans le mandat d'arrestation visant sa sœur.
[19]
Cependant, en ce qui a trait à certaines questions importantes concernant son exposé des risques et sa demande sur place, le peu de crédibilité de la demanderesse peut être confirmé. Un argument important avancé pour avoir hébergé sa sœur est qu'elles n'avaient pas d'autre choix, malgré le risque sérieux de répercussions graves contre elle et le fait qu'il s'agissait d'un des premiers endroits où les autorités chercheraient sa sœur. Pourtant, lorsqu'elle a décidé de fuir, sur les conseils de ses parents, elle est partie vivre dans un endroit éloigné chez un oncle maternel. Il semble qu'il s'agissait de l'endroit le plus approprié et tout indiqué où sa sœur pouvait trouver refuge en raison de la gravité de sa situation et du risque connu que couraient les membres de la famille qui l'avaient hébergée.
[20]
Le commissaire avait également des raisons de mettre en doute la crédibilité de la demanderesse lorsqu'en racontant son récit des faits mettant en cause la voisine, elle a omis la preuve essentielle selon laquelle le BSP aurait dit à sa voisine qu'il soupçonnait fortement que la demanderesse était aussi une adepte de l'organisation clandestine du Falun Gong ou autrement associée à des adeptes de celle-ci. Cette preuve provenant d'une source inconnue constituerait le fondement de son assignation assortie d'un mandat d'arrestation qui est à l'origine de son départ pour le Canada et de son allégation selon laquelle, si elle retournait elle serait arrêtée du fait qu'elle est une adepte du Falun Gong, et non seulement pour avoir hébergé sa sœur. Puisque les deux mandats d'arrestation indiquaient que différentes dispositions de la loi avaient été violées, il semble que la demanderesse n'ait pas été accusée de la même infraction que sa sœur qui était une adepte du Falun Gong.
[21]
Il y a également suffisamment d'éléments de preuve à l'appui des préoccupations du commissaire quant à la crédibilité de la demanderesse concernant sa demande sur place. La preuve fournie pour justifier le fait d'être devenue adepte du Falun Gong a peu de poids. De vagues problèmes de santé mentale non documentés, aucunement corroborés bien que résidente du Canada, précédés par un témoignage incohérent selon lequel elle n'aurait pas subi la même pression mentale en Chine alors qu'elle vivait des problèmes matrimoniaux et subséquemment un divorce, justifient très peu le fait d'adhérer à une discipline. Le commissaire peut également précisé que la demanderesse a tenté de soigneusement documenter et corroborer d'autres parties de son témoignage et était représentée par un avocat d'expérience en matière d'immigration.
[22]
À cet égard, je suis d'avis que l'idée de se joindre au Falun Gong et de participer publiquement à des protestations antigouvernementales pourrait être considérée comme peu judicieuse étant donné l'audience de la SPR en attente et ainsi motivée par une intention de créer un risque qui autrement n'existerait pas à son retour en Chine.
[23]
Le témoignage de la demanderesse concernant la date à laquelle elle s'est jointe au Falun Gong soulève également des questions sérieuses au chapitre de sa crédibilité. Lorsque l'on a examiné la preuve de sa participation à des protestations antigouvernementales et qu'on lui a demandé pourquoi elle ne portait pas les mêmes vêtements que les autres adeptes, elle a expliqué qu'elle venait tout juste de se joindre officiellement au groupe ce jour-là, et elle se souvenait précisément de cette protestation qui avait eu lieu cette année-là, en mai 2013. Pourtant, elle affirme dans un autre témoignage qu'elle s'est jointe au groupe en mai 2012, ce qui aurait été étayé par le témoignage d'autres adeptes. J'estime que les deux versions quant à la date de son adhésion au Falun Gong sont inconciliables.
[24]
Il est bien établi en droit que la Cour doit faire preuve d'une déférence considérable à l'égard du commissaire, en particulier au chapitre de la crédibilité. La crédibilité relève directement du domaine d'expertise des tribunaux administratifs, surtout lorsque, comme dans la présente affaire, le commissaire a l'avantage d'entendre et d'observer la demanderesse. La Cour ne peut intervenir que lorsque des conclusions sont tirées de façon abusive, arbitraire ou sans tenir compte des éléments dont disposait le tribunal. Lorsque des difficultés quant à la crédibilité du témoignage du demandeur se posent à l'égard de questions importantes, même en tenant compte des problèmes liés à l'appréciation du commissaire dans d'autres domaines, le critère élevé en matière de droit administratif qui permet à la Court d'intervenir n'est pas rempli.
[25]
Comme l'a souligné la juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> « les contradictions relevées dans la preuve, particulièrement dans le témoignage du demandeur d'asile, donneront généralement raison à la SPR de conclure que le demandeur manque de crédibilité, et, si cette conclusion est jugée raisonnable, la Cour refusera d'intervenir pour annuler la décision rejetant la totalité de la demande d'asile » (renvois omis).
[26]
Les conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité de la demanderesse entraînent le rejet de la demande sur place. Elles étayent également la conclusion subsidiaire de la SPR selon laquelle son retour en Chine l'expose seulement à un risque généralisé au sens de l'article 97 et non à un risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités, ou à un risque de torture.
[27]
Ses allégations voulant qu'elle ait été arrêtée et détenue parce qu'elle était soupçonnée d'être membre du Falun Gong ne sont pas étayées par son propre témoignage selon lequel, lorsqu'il s'est rendu chez ses parents, le BSP l'a arrêtée parce qu'elle hébergeait une activiste illégale du Falun Gong. De même, son omission contradictoire, de ne pas mentionner dans son témoignage que sa voisine lui avait dit qu'on la soupçonnait fortement d'être membre du Falun Gong, appuie la conclusion qu'elle ne recevrait pas le même traitement que sa sœur du fait qu'elle soit simplement une adepte de la discipline.
[28]
La Cour conclut que la décision de la SPR appartient aux issues raisonnables et acceptables et est étayée par des motifs transparents et intelligibles fondés sur les faits et le droit.
VII. Conclusion
[29]
Par conséquent, la demande est rejetée. Aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification et aucune ne sera certifiée.
JUGEMENT
[30]
LA COUR STATUE que
la demande est rejetée et qu'aucune question n'est certifiée aux fins d'appel.
[End of document]