 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) 
 
 
 
 Indexed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appealed from a prothonotary's decision dismissing its motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the appeal. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 2583 
 
 Registrars and prothonotaries - Appeals from - Scope of review - The defendant Crown appealed from a prothonotary's decision dismissing its motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim - The Federal Court stated that the mere fact that what was sought before the prothonotary might have been determinative of the final issues in the case did not result in the judge hearing the matter entirely de novo - A reading of the decisions, and particularly the key decision of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  prothonotary ordered which had to be determinative of the final issues in order for the judge to be required to undertake de novo review - The recent decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in the motion", did not mean by that the motion which was before the prothonotary but rather the motion (see rule 51) which was before the judge on appeal from the prothonotary - Barring extraordinary circumstances, a decision of a prothonotary not to strike out a statement of claim was not determinative of any final issue in the case - In determining the standard of review, the focus was on the order as it was pronounced, not on what it might have been - See paragraph 2. 
 
 
 
 Crown - Topic 1241 
 
 Contracts with Crown - Breach by the Crown - General - [See  
 Crown - Topic 1249 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Crown - Topic 1249 
 
 Contracts with Crown - Breach by the Crown - Damages - The defendant Crown appealed from a prothonotary's decision dismissing its motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim - The Federal Court dismissed the appeal - The Crown contended that the plaintiff's action was a disguised or collateral attack on an administrative decision not to grant it a business license for the summertime operation of its gondola on Mount Norquay in Banff National Park - Relying on  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by a judicial review application - However, the court found, as did the prothonotary, that the action against the Crown simply sounded in breach of contract - The essence of the plaintiff's claim was that the Crown by enacting a management plan for Banff National Park, including a prohibition against summer operation of the plaintiff's gondola on Mount Norquay, made it impossible for the plaintiff to obtain a business license, and thus to have the quiet enjoyment of the leased premises, something which the Crown by entering into the lease had engaged itself contractually to grant to it - It was a gross misreading of the Grenier decision to hold that it required that every time a Crown official decided deliberately not to respect his employer's contractual obligations that that "decision" had to first be attacked by judicial review before an action in damages could be brought - That was not, and never had been, the law - See paragraphs 3 to 9. 
 
 
 
 Crown - Topic 1250 
 
 Contracts with Crown - Breach by the Crown - Judicial review - [See  
 Crown - Topic 1249 
 ]. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  consd. [para. 4]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Richard B. Low, Q.C., for the plaintiff; 
 
 Brenda Kaminski and Laura Dunham, for the defendant. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Bennett Jones LLP, Calgary, Alberta, for the plaintiff; 
 
 John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the defendant. 
 
 
 
 This appeal was heard at Calgary, Alberta, on June 28, 2007, by Hugessen, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following oral decision on June 28, 2007 and written reasons on June 29, 2007. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Hugessen, J. 
  [orally]: This is an appeal from a decision of the prothonotary which dismissed the defendant's (Crown's) motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  Because I am in agreement with the prothonotary, not only with his conclusion but also with the reasons he gave in support thereof, it is not necessary that I go in any detail into the standard of review applicable to appeals to a judge from a decision of a prothonotary. I would only note, however, that with respect and contrary to the submission that was made to me by Crown counsel, the mere fact that what was sought before the prothonotary might have been determinative of the final issues in the case does not result in the judge hearing the matter entirely de novo. A reading of the decisions, and particularly the key decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), makes it quite clear that it is not what was sought but what was ordered by the prothonotary which must be determinative of the final issues in order for the judge to be required to undertake de novo review. I would add to that, that while I am of course aware of the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 315 N.R. 175 (F.C.A.), where Justice Décary in reformulating the rule spoke of "the questions raised in the motion", but I am quite sure that he did not mean by that the motion which was before the prothonotary but rather the motion (see Rule 51) which was before the judge on appeal from the prothonotary. Put briefly, barring extraordinary circumstances, a decision of a prothonotary not to strike out a statement of claim is not determinative of any final issue in the case. In determining the standard of review the focus is on the Order as it was pronounced, not on what it might have been. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The Crown's motion to strike, like its appeal before me, is based on the contention that the action of the plaintiff is a disguised or collateral attack on an administrative decision not to grant the plaintiff a business license for the operation in summertime of its gondola on Mount Norquay in Banff National Park. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Relying on the case of  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 344 N.R. 102; 2005 FCA 348, the Crown says the plaintiff should first have attacked the license refusal by an application for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  A reading of the statement of claim, the statement of defence and the reply, however, leave me convinced, as was the prothonotary, that the action against the Crown simply sounds in breach of contract. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The essence of the plaintiff's claim is that the Crown by enacting a management plan for Banff National Park, including a prohibition against summer operation of the plaintiff's gondola on Mount Norquay, made it impossible for the plaintiff to obtain a business license, and thus to have the quiet enjoyment of the leased premises, something which the Crown by entering into the lease had engaged itself contractually to grant to it. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  I do not need to pronounce on the validity of the plaintiff's claim or whether or not its interpretation of the lease is accurate. Other than to say that it is in no respect depends on the invalidity of the licensing decision. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  On the contrary, as I read the claim, it is the prohibition contained in the management plan and the consequential, even if valid, refusal of the license which form the basis of the allegation of deliberate breach by the Crown of its contractual obligations. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  In my view, it is a gross misreading of the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
  to hold that it requires that every time a Crown official decides deliberately not to respect his employer's contractual obligations that that "decision" must first be attacked by judicial review before an action in damages may be brought. I respectfully suggest that that is not, and has never been, the law. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The appeal will be dismissed with costs to the plaintiff. 
 
 
 
 Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Jana A. Andersen/gs 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



