 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Summary: 
 
 The Solicitor General did not renew Holt's appointment as a member of the National Parole Board. She commenced an action in tort for damages against the federal Crown alleging discrimination based on sex, religion and political affiliation. Holt then applied to amend her statement of claim to add three defendants. She alleged that the Chairman of the National Parole Board and two unknown persons (John Doe and Jane Doe) conspired to prevent her from being reappointed and discriminated against her. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed her application to add the defendants on the ground that the court lacked jurisdiction over tort claims under provincial law. The court held, however, that a claim by Holt that the Crown was vicariously liable for the torts of the defendants was permissible. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 4028 
 
 Federal Court of Canada - Jurisdiction - Trial Division - Claims against federal Crown and related claims - Private co-defendants - The Solicitor General did not renew Holt's appointment as a member of the National Parole Board - She sued the federal Crown in tort for damages, alleging discrimination on the basis of sex, religion and political affiliation - She applied to add the Parole Board Chairman and two unknown persons (John and Jane Doe) as defendants - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed her application to add the defendants because the court lacked jurisdiction over tort claims under provincial law - The court held, however, that Holt's claim that the Crown was vicariously liable for the torts of the defendants was permissible. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , appld. [paras. 6, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , consd. [paras. 12, 21, 24]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , consd. [paras. 22, 24]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982, sect. 15 [para. 11]. 
 
 Constitution Act, 1867, sect. 91(27), sect. 91(28) [para. 14]. 
 
 Crown Liability Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38, sect. 3(1)(a), sect. 4(2) [para. 28]. 
 
 Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, sect. 17(4)(b) [para. 7]. 
 
 Federal Court Rules, rule 303(1), rule 420, rule 424, rule 427, rule 1716(2) [para. 1]. 
 
 Parole Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-2, sect. 3(1), sect. 3(2), sect. 4(3) [para. 9]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 N. Matheson, for the plaintiff; 
 
 M. Taylor, for the defendant. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Pierce, Van Loon, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the plaintiff; 
 
 F. Iacobucci, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, for the defendant. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard in Vancouver, British Columbia, on April 18, 1988, before McNair, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on April 19, 1988: 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 McNair, J. 
 : This is an application by the plaintiff for leave to amend the statement of claim and to add as party defendants to the action the former Chairman of the National Parole Board, William R. Outerbridge, and the presently fictitious defendants, John Doe and Jane Doe. The application is made pursuant to Federal Court Rules 303(1), 420, 424, 427 and 1716(2). 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  An original statement of claim was filed on June 11, 1987. The defendant filed an appearance pursuant to rule 402(3) on July 6, 1987. A defence in the form of a general denial was filed on September 8, 1987. On January 27, 1988, an amended defence was filed. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Essentially, the plaintiff's cause of complaint giving rise to this action in tort for damages is the failure of the Solicitor General to renew her appointment as a member of the National Parole Board by reason of alleged discrimination based on sex, religion and political affiliation. The plaintiff was appointed as a member of the Board for an initial term of one year, following which she was reappointed for a further period of three years on April 1, 1982. She claims to have been wrongfully dismissed without cause on or about June 11, 1985. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Counsel for the defendant has agreed to the proposed amendments insofar as they relate solely to the Crown, subject to plaintiff's counsel agreeing to the filing of an amended statement of defence in response thereto. Hence, the sole issues to be determined are whether this court has jurisdiction over the causes of action alleged against William R. Outerbridge, John Doe and Jane Doe, as pleaded in paragraphs 3, 4, 21 and 22 of the statement of claim and the claim of vicarious liability on the part of the Crown as set out in paragraph 15 thereof. The contentious paragraphs read as follows: 
 
 
 
 "3. The Defendant, William R. Outerbridge (hereinafter referred to as 'Outerbridge'), was at all times material to this action the Chairman of the National Parole Board, and an agent, servant or employee of the Solicitor General, and resides at 534 Golden, Ottawa, Ontario, K2A 2E7. 
 
 
 
 "4. John Doe and Jane Doe are persons unknown who conspired with Outerbridge to deny or infringe the Plaintiff's rights and freedoms. 
 
 
 
 "15. The Solicitor General is vicariously liable for the actions of Outerbridge. 
 
 
 
 "21. Outerbridge conspired with John Doe, Jane Doe and other persons unknown to unlawfully prevent the Plaintiff from receiving her initial appointment to the National Parole Board and further conspired with John Doe, Jane Doe and other persons unknown to prevent her reappointment to the National Parole Board, and maliciously misinformed the Minister responsible, and the Prime Minister with respect to the Plaintiff, all with the intent to deny or infringe the Plaintiff's rights and freedoms, and deprive her of her employment and continued employment. 
 
 
 
 "22. Further or in the alternative, Outerbridge discriminated against the Plaintiff by misinforming, or not informing at all the Minister responsible and the Prime Minister, and others, or any of them, with respect to the Plaintiff's capabilities, and the said misinformation or failure to inform was motivated by Outerbridge's bias, and prejudice against the Plaintiff on the basis of her sex, religion and/or political affiliation and Outerbridge thereby denied or infringed the Plaintiff's rights and freedoms, and violated the Charter, and caused the Plaintiff loss, damage and expense." 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The plaintiff insists that the court has jurisdiction to entertain the pleaded causes of action and further maintains that it is necessary that these three defendants be added in order to ensure that all matters in dispute in the action may be fully adjudicated upon by the court. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In order to determine whether a particular matter is within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court, it is necessary to satisfy the requirements of the test prescribed by the Supreme Court of Canada in ITO --  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Mr. Justice McIntyre, writing for the majority, set out the legal criteria at p. 766 S.C.R.: 
 
 
 
 "The general extent of the jurisdiction of the Federal Court has been the subject of much judicial consideration in recent years.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the essential requirements to support a finding of jurisdiction in the Federal Court were established. They are: 
 
 
 
 1. There must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament. 
 
 
 
 2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 3. The law on which the case is based must be 'a law of Canada' as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the Construction Act, 1867." 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Counsel for the plaintiff contends that the first part of the test is met by s. 17(4)(b) of the Federal Court Act, which reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "17(4) The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction 
 
 
 
 (b) in proceedings in which relief is sought against any person for anything done or omitted to be done in the performance of his duties as an officer or servant of the Crown." 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  It was not strenuously contended that Mr. Outerbridge was not an officer or a servant of the Crown for the purposes of the test, but counsel for the defendant does not concede the point. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Plaintiff's counsel alluded to the appointment of board members by the Governor-in-Council and the designation by that executive authority of one of such members to be Chairman and another to be Vice-Chairman, as provided by subsections 3(1) and 3(2) of the Parole Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-2, as amended. She also stressed the fact that subsection 4(3) of the Act designated the Chairman as the chief executive officer of the Board and charged him with general supervision over the work and the staff of the Board. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The statutory provisions relied on read as follows: 
 
 
 
 "3(1) There shall be a board, to be known as the National Parole Board, consisting of not more than thirty-six members to be appointed by the Governor-in-Council to hold office during good behaviour for a period not exceeding ten years. 
 
 
 
 "(2.1) ... 
 
 
 
 "(2) The Governor-in-Council shall designate one of the members to be Chairman and one to be Vice-Chairman. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "4(3) The Chairman is the chief executive officer of the Board and has supervision over and direction of the work and the staff of the Board." 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The second branch of the test enunciated by ITO, supra, requires that there be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction. Counsel for the plaintiff contends that Outerbridge and the fictitious Doe defendants conspired illegally to bring about the plaintiff's dismissal from the National Parole Board, thereby denying her equality rights and discriminating against her in violation of section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Counsel further submits that there is a strong likelihood of evidence being brought out during pre-trial discoveries that might show that Outerbridge played a prominent role as chief executive officer of the Board in influencing the Cabinet decision not to reappoint the plaintiff as a member of the Board. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Counsel for the plaintiff relies heavily on an obiter statement in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. The statement was to the effect that the trial judge may not have been wrong in her refusal to dismiss the plaintiff's claim on a preliminary motion on the ground of lack of jurisdiction, where it was possible that evidence at trial might establish that the defendant played a decisive, consultative role in influencing the Minister's decision. This statement seems somewhat at odds with the actual result of the court's decision, which was to uphold the appeal and dismiss the plaintiff's action as against the defendant College. In any event, plaintiff's counsel makes the analogy that the second ITO test is met by pleading allegations of Charter violations vis-à-vis the administration of the Parole Act, where there was some possibility of evidence going to show Outerbridge's decisive role in influencing the Crown's decision to dismiss the plaintiff. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The third criterion of the ITO test requires that the law on which the case for jurisdiction is based must be "a law of Canada" as the phrase is used in section 101 of the Constitution Act, 1867. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  It is urged here that the Charter is clearly a matter of federal law, falling within federal legislative competence under the general peace, order and good government power accorded by section 91 of the Act as well as coming within the federal powers with respect to criminal law and the establishment, maintenance and management of penitentiaries under sections 91(27) and 91(28) respectively. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Counsel for the plaintiff argues that if the court finds that it has jurisdiction to entertain the causes of action alleged against the additional defendants then the issue of vicarious liability on the part of the Crown will automatically follow. Alternatively, she submits that if the court determines that it lacks such jurisdiction then the Crown is still vicariously liable for the actions complained of on the part of Outerbridge, citing  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). I prefer to leave this submission for the moment and will deal with it later. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Counsel for the defendant contends that the court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the individual causes of action against the persons identified in paragraphs 3, 4, 15, 21 and 22 of the amended statement of claim. He characterizes these causes of action as constituting the torts of conspiracy and deceit, and submits that they are founded on provincial and not federal law. Thus, he urges that the plaintiff has failed to meet the requirements of the second and third branches of the test criteria prescribed by ITO in that there is no existing body of applicable federal law to underpin the jurisdiction of the Federal Court with respect to the causes of action alleged against the individual defendants. In short, there exists no body of federal law essential to the disposition of the case. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  In my view, the issue on this aspect of the case is whether there is a sufficient jurisdictional nexus between the causes of action alleged against the individual defendants and some existing body of federal law "which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction" within the second branch of the ITO test. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Defendants' counsel buttressed his submission by citing  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), aff'g [1979] 2 F.C. 476 (T.D.). Essentially, this case held that while s. 17(4)(b) of the Federal Court Act permits servants of the Crown to be sued in the Federal Court, the mere fact of impleading them in that forum does not constitute an existing body of federal law sufficient to entertain actions in negligence against them, which are clearly matters of provincial law. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Similarly, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Act was insufficient to found jurisdiction to entertain the action as against individual defendants because the claims against them were based on tort and not federal law, notwithstanding the involvement of the Income Tax Act. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  Mr. Justice LeDain, writing the unanimous opinion of the court, put it this way at p. 630: 
 
 
 
 "... In the present case, despite the necessary application of the provisions of the Income Tax Act to the question of validity or legal justification, the right to damages cannot be said to be provided for by federal law. If it exists at all, it is created by provincial law. The applicable federal law does not purport to create or provide for this right." 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The Varnam case, supra, is the most recent pronouncement of the Federal Court of Appeal on the question of statutory jurisdiction. Here, the plaintiff was a physician whose authorization to prescribe the drug methadone was revoked under a notice issued pursuant to sections 53, 58 and 59 of the Narcotic Control Regulations. By the terms of s. 58 of the Regulations, the Minister could only act "after consultation with" the College. The action against the College was founded upon tortious claims of negligent misrepresentation and conspiracy to intentionally interfere with his right and ability to carry on his profession. The College moved to have the action against it dismissed for want of prosecution. The trial judge dismissed the motion on the ground that the claim against the College was so intertwined with the claim against the Crown as to bring the action within the court's jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  Plaintiff's counsel bases her case for adding the individual defendants on the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which a prisoner, whose mandatory supervision had been wrongly revoked, was successful in persuading the court that an action in tort for damages lay against the individual defendants as officers of the National Parole Board who participated in the wrongful revocation. It was argued that the circumstances surrounding the prisoner's detention and release were governed by the provisions of the Parole Act and the Penitentiary Act, which constituted "a detailed statutory framework and scheme of regulation in existing and applicable federal law sufficient to underpin the jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Canada". 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  Stone, J., stated the following reasons for the court's decision at pp. 155-156: 
 
 
 
 "There thus appears, to use the phrase of Laskin, C.J.C, in the Rhine and Prytula [see footnote 1] case, 'a detailed statutory framework' of federal law under which the appellant not only acquired the right to be free but also the right to remain so. It must be emphasized that, as he remained under sentence, the quality of freedom he enjoyed was not the same as that possessed by a person not under sentence. Its limits were demarcated by federal statutes. If the torts of false arrest and imprisonment were committed as alleged, they were committed because his right to remain free thus delineated was interfered with. I do not think that law need expressly provide a remedy for such interference for the claims to be governed by it. These torts, in my view, depend for their existence upon federal law; any provable damages resulting from their commission are recoverable in the Trial Division. I have concluded that the claims are provided for in the 'laws of Canada' or 'federal law'." 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 1.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Mr. Justice Hugessen distinguished Oag from Varnam on the basis that the wrongful act complained of in the former case sprang from the twin statutory sources of the Parole Act and the Penitentiary Act, whereas the mere consultative process envisaged by section 58 of the Narcotic Control Regulations  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  seemed "far too thin a thread on which to hang the jurisdiction of this court". I fully endorse his perceptive distinction. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  In my opinion, the tortious claims asserted against the individual defendants do not derive from an existing body of federal law governing liability in the context of providing a "detailed statutory framework" sufficient to fasten liability on such defendants. The fact that the defendant Outerbridge was the chief executive officer charged with general supervision over the work and affairs of the National Parole Board is far too fragile a link on which to found jurisdiction against him in his individual capacity. Under the circumstances, I find that the causes of action asserted against the individual defendants are not attributable to any fountainhead source of federal law but rather, if they exist at all, are the emanations of provincial law relating to tortious liability. That being so, the part of the motion seeking leave to add William R. Outerbridge, John Doe and Jane Doe as party defendants is refused. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  Counsel for the plaintiff makes the point that even if the court finds that it lacks jurisdiction over the defendants Outerbridge and John and Jane Doe then it is still possible for the Crown to be held vicariously liable for the part they played as officers or servants of the Crown in bringing about the plaintiff's downfall as a member of the National Parole Board. She further maintains that the allegations pleaded in paragraphs 3, 4, 21 and 22 of the amended statement of claim are sufficient to support the claim of vicarious liability on the part of the Solicitor General as pleaded in paragraph 15. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  Defendants' counsel objects that paragraph 15 does nothing more than plead a proposition of law. He further maintains that the remaining paragraphs 3, 4, 21 and 22 should not be allowed to stand as substantiating the plea of vicarious liability, assuming that the amendment designed to implead these individuals personally is refused. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  Plaintiff's counsel counters with the argument that the whole foundation of the plaintiff's action revolves around the matter of appointments to the National Parole Board and the actions of the then Chairman, which are said to constitute the torts of conspiracy and misfeasance in public office. The result, in her submission, is that the Solicitor General can still be held vicariously liable for the wrongful acts of the Chairman and his conspiratorial associates, notwithstanding the fact that they cannot be sued personally in the Federal Court. As indicated, she supports this submission by citing the case of Stephens' Estate, supra, and makes reference to the statutory provisions alluded to therein, namely, paragraph 3(1)(a) and subsection 4(2) of the Crown Liability Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38, which read as follows: 
 
 
 
 "3(1) The Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which, if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable 
 
 
 
 (a) in respect of a tort committed by a servant of the Crown, or ... 
 
 
 
 "4(2) No proceedings lie against the Crown by virtue of paragraph 3(1)(a) in respect of any act or omission of a servant of the Crown unless the act or omission would apart from the provisions of this Act have given rise to a cause of action in tort against that servant or his personal representative." 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  I agree with the submission of plaintiff's counsel that the lack of jurisdiction against Outerbridge personally does not automatically foreclose a claim of vicarious liability against the Crown, as represented by the Solicitor General, for any acts of misfeasance on the part of Outerbridge as an officer of the National Parole Board. The very point was decided in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Trial Division allowed the Crown's application on the ground that the court lacked jurisdiction to entertain the claims for damages against it. This conclusion appeared to be treated as following necessarily from the decision that the court lacked jurisdiction to entertain the action as against the defendants other than the Crown. I cannot agree with this conclusion.  
 Anomalous as it may seem that the court should have jurisdiction to entertain an action for the vicarious liability of the Crown, when it would not have jurisdiction to entertain an action against the Crown servants for whose acts the Crown is to be held liable, I cannot see how that anomaly is to be avoided. 
  The vicarious liability of the Crown and the right of action against it are created by paragraph 3(1)(a) of the  
 Crown Liability Act 
  and would not exist apart from it. Thus it appears to be undeniable that the claim is founded on federal law. Whether the acts of the defendants other than the Crown would give rise to a cause of action in tort, for purposes of subsection 4(2) of the  
 Act 
 , must be determined by what, in an action against them, would have to be considered provincial law, but that cannot, in my respectful opinion, make the vicarious liability of the Crown for those acts any less a cause of action founded on federal law when it is so clearly provided for by the  
 Crown Liability Act. 
 " (emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  Accordingly, I disallow the application for leave to amend by adding as party defendants William R. Outerbridge and the unknown parties, John Doe and Jane Doe, and their names are stricken accordingly from the style of cause. Thus, the statement of claim is rendered innocuous and ineffective with respect to its capability for sustaining any basis of personal liability on the part of anyone but the Crown. In my view, the allegations pleaded in paragraphs 3, 15, 21 and 22 of the statement of claim raise a reasonably arguable case that the Solicitor General may well be vicariously liable for the actions of Outerbridge as an officer or servant of the Crown. Amended paragraph 4 serves no practical purpose in substantiating the plea of vicarious liability and is therefore disallowed. If it should become apparent later that other officers or servants of the Crown acted in concert with Outerbridge in wrongfully abusing and infringing the plaintiff's rights then an appropriate amendment can be sought at that time to name them as fellow conspirators in the plot. 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  In the result, my decision is to permit paragraphs 3, 15, 21 and 22 of the amended statement of claim to stand, but on the basis that the two last mentioned paragraphs be renumbered as paragraphs 4 and 5 and with the deletion from former paragraph 21 (now paragraph 4) of any specfic reference to "John Doe, Jane Doe". The remaining paragraphs of the statement of claim can be renumbered accordingly. Plaintiff's counsel may wish to consider adding a further paragraph by way of pleading the particular sections of the Crown Liability Act relied on and any additional facts deemed requisite for bringing the case within the purview of the statutory provisions. In any event, particulars can always be utilized for narrowing or bringing into clearer focus the issue of vicarious liability. The defendant shall have, of course, the usual period of thirty days for filing a defence to the amended statement of claim. Costs of the application shall be to the defendant in the cause. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  An order will go accordingly. 
 
 
 
 Order accordingly. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



