 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lorne v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2006), 289 F.T.R. 282 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2006] F.T.R. TBEd. AP.007 
 
 
 
 Daniella Chandya Lorne (applicant) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent) 
 
 (IMM-3542-05; 2006 FC 384) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Lorne v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 von Finckenstein, J. 
 
 March 27, 2006. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The applicant, a 21 year old Jamaican woman, alleged that she was sexually abused by her stepfather until she left Jamaica in 2001. The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found that the applicant's failure to mention the abuse either in Jamaica or in Canada belied her fear of persecution. It also found that the applicant had not rebutted the documentary evidence establishing that state protection was available in Jamaica. The applicant applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application, set aside the Board's decision and remitted the matter for reconsideration by a different panel of the Board. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1313.6 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Refugee protection - Rejection of claims (incl. compelling reasons exception) - The applicant, a 21 year old Jamaican woman, alleged that she was sexually abused by her stepfather until she left Jamaica in 2001 - The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found that the applicant's failure to mention the abuse either in Jamaica or in Canada belied her fear of persecution - It also found that the applicant had not rebutted the documentary evidence establishing that state protection was available in Jamaica - The applicant applied for judicial review, arguing that the Board erred in ruling that circumstances were not so "atrocious and appalling" as to require a compelling reasons analysis under s. 108(4) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act - The Federal Court rejected the argument - "Compelling reasons" considerations only applied once there was a finding of Convention refugee or person in need of protection - Since the Board made neither finding in this case, there was no need to consider "compelling reasons" - See paragraphs 9 to 12. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Persecution - Protection of country of nationality - The applicant, a 21 year old Jamaican woman, alleged that her stepfather inappropriately touched her beginning at the age of six and sexually molested her on a weekly basis from 1995 (when she was 12 years-old) until she left Jamaica in 2001 - The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found that the applicant's failure to mention the abuse either in Jamaica or in Canada belied her fear of persecution - It also found that the applicant had not rebutted the documentary evidence establishing that state protection was available in Jamaica - The applicant applied for judicial review - The Federal Court allowed the application - The Board's decision was not reasonable where the Board did not state that it did not find the applicant to be credible - Nor did it state that it rejected evidence given by a social worker that victims of incest "normalized" the mistreatment and did not disclose it - See paragraphs 13 to 20. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27, sect. 108(4) [para. 10]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Michael Crane, for the applicant; 
 
 Neeta Logsetty, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Michael Crane, for the applicant; 
 
 John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on March 22, 2005, at Toronto, Ontario. before von Finckenstein, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following decision on March 27, 2006. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 Background 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 von Finckenstein, J. 
 : The Applicant, a 21 year old Jamaican woman, alleges that her stepfather inappropriately touched her beginning at the age of six and sexually molested her on a weekly basis from 1995 (when she was 12 years-old) until she left Jamaica in 2001 (when she was 18 years-old). He threatened to kill her if she told anyone about this. She did not inform her mother of any of this abuse although she believes her mother suspected it was occurring and the Applicant only reported it to a teacher who took no action other than comforting her. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  Her father is an army officer with high rank. The Applicant believes that her father murdered her mother even though the police ruled it self-inflicted. The doctor concluded it was not suicide as the majority of the kerosene burns were on her back. Furthermore, subsequent to the Applicant leaving Jamaica, her father caused her sister to be arrested and, upon seeing him on the street, beat up her brother. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Her mother sent her to the United States to live with her half-sister in Brooklyn in July 2001. She stayed there for three months. Her application for a Canadian Visitor's Visa, so that she could visit an aunt, was refused. However, she still came to Canada in September 2001. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Once in Canada and informed of her mother's death and the lack of investigation by the police, the Applicant and her aunt decided she should marry a Canadian citizen in order to remain here to avoid her father. She became involved with a man and lived with him until July 2004. She thought he would help her get status in Canada. He became abusive and took her passport and said he would cause her to be deported if she left him. As a result, she left and went to a women's shelter. She made her refugee claim in August 2004. 
 
 
 
 Decision 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board") held the two issues in this case to be: (1) whether the claimant's fear is well-founded and (2) the availability of state protection. The Board found that her failure to mention the abuse either in Jamaica or in Canada prior to completing her PIF belied her fear of persecution. It also found that she had not rebutted the documentary evidence establishing state protection is available in Jamaica. 
 
 
 
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The Applicant seeks judicial review of the decision contending that the Board erred in 
 
 
 
 a) ruling that circumstances were not so "atrocious and appalling" as to require a compelling reasons analysis under s. 108(4) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , S.C. 2001, c. 27 (" 
 IRPA 
 "); 
 
 
 
 b) finding that the Applicant lacked subjective fear by: 
 
 
 
 i. holding that the Applicant, a child of 12 years when the rapes began, should have made some reasonable efforts to obtain protection; and 
 
 
 
 ii. ignoring the expert evidence that victims of incest "normalize" the mistreatment and therefore it is not surprising that the Applicant failed to report it at the earliest opportunity; and 
 
 
 
 c) misinterpreting the evidence of the availability of state protection. 
 
 
 
 Standard of review 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, Justice Tremblay-Lamer found at para 11: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [8] 
  I fully concur with that analysis and consequently will apply a reasonableness simpliciter standard. 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 Compelling reasons 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Board's dealt with "compelling reasons" very briefly. It stated: 
 
 
 
 "I considered the claimant's psychological condition and the circumstances of the claim, and I am unable to find evidence of persecution so 'atrocious and appalling' that I should assess whether there are compelling reasons in this case." 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Compelling reasons has its origin in s. 108 of  
 IRPA 
  which states: 
 
 
 
 "108(1) A claim for refugee protection shall be rejected, and a person is not a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection, in any of the following circumstances: 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (e) the reasons for which the person sought refugee protection have ceased to exist. 
 
 
 
 (4) Paragraph (1)(e) does not apply to a person who establishes that there are compelling reasons arising out of previous persecution, torture, treatment or punishment for refusing to avail themselves of the protection of the country which they left, or outside of which they remained, due to such previous persecution, torture, treatment or punishment." 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  It is well established that "compelling reasons" considerations only apply once there is a finding of Convention refugee or person in need of protection. In this case, as the Board made neither finding, there was no need to consider "compelling reasons". 
 
 
 
 See  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 See also,  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The statement by the Board was superfluous and not necessary for its decision. It is therefore unnecessary for me to consider whether the Board properly applied  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , above or whether it should have followed  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, as suggested by the Applicant. 
 
 
 
 Lack of subjective fear 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The Board made the following finding: 
 
 
 
 "I find that the claimant does not have a subjective fear. If her fear were well-founded, it could be expected that she might make some effort to seek help, assistance and relief before coming to Canada. In oral testimony, she testified that Lorne raped her over a six-year period, once or twice a week. She could have tried to obtain protection in Jamaica, but she did not make a determined effort. She could have applied for protection in the U.S. in 2001 before coming to Canada, but she did not. Further, she might have made efforts to obtain protection in Canada before she actually did. She delayed making a claim for over three years after she entered Canada illegally. Lastly, if her fear were well-founded, she ought to have mentioned the sexual abuse by her father in her Citizenship and Immigration (CIC) In-Person Refugee In-take, Record of Examination, but she did not. When she was asked about this significant omission, the claimant explained that she was scared and too ashamed to mention in at the time of her interview." 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The Board then observed: 
 
 
 
 "The panel acknowledges that she was only a child when the alleged abuse began. However, the panel believes that she ought to have made some reasonable effort to obtain protection. In oral testimony, she testified that she did not tell her mother about the abuse at anytime because she was afraid what her father might do. She explained that her mother might have suspected. She said that one of her sisters had told her that their father had 'tried to come on to her sexually' (as well). However, she believed if she were to report her father's abuse to her mother, that for reasons unknown, her mother would have denied it. 
 
 
 
 "Ms. Heila Ritter, the claimant's social worker at the Bethesda House (a woman's shelter), testified the claimant had told her in counselling sessions that she (the claimant) had told one of her teachers about the abuse. However, her teacher did not help her as the teacher did not report this to the police." 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Ms. Pitter, a social worker of Jamaican origin, testified regarding "normalizing" at page 160 of the Tribunal Record: 
 
 
 
 "Q: Okay, do you have any comments about her ... the fact that she did not directly disclose the sexual abuse? 
 
 A: That is very, very, that's normal. It doesn't matter what country, it's normal for childhood victims not to disclose because of the shame around the issue, especially when it's incest. 
 
 
 
 One it's sort of normalized and also there is a tremendous element of shame that goes with it when the child gets to the age where they realize that this is not normal, this is not happening to my friend next door. Then there's a whole element of shame, this is a big disgrace, I can't tell. And then there's also the, it's my fault, I did something wrong so they feel sometimes the blame along with the shame. So it's very very normal for that behaviour in terms of not disclosing and it takes some work to have that happen." 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The Applicant contends that it is unreasonable to expect a scared child of twelve who is being raped twice weekly to do more than report the matter to her teacher. The Applicant further suggests that the Board completely ignored the evidence of Ms. Pitter who testified regarding the normalizing of incest by abused children. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Nowhere in its decision did the Board either state that it did not find the Applicant credible or that it rejected the evidence regarding normalizing by Ms. Pitter. Its reasoning, as above quoted, seems to suggest that a child needs to do more than tell her teacher about the abuse by her father. No rationale for this assumption is given. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Board's decision is not reasonable, as Justice Muldoon observed in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [19] 
  Similarly, the evidence by Ms. Pitter regarding normalizing would fully explain the actions of the Applicant. The Board heard the argument but did not address it at all. Thus, we do not know why it was rejected by the Board. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  Failure to address both these points, which are pivotal to the finding of lack of subjective fear, while at the same time not finding that the Applicant lacked credibility, and failing to explain why it rejected the expert advice amounts to a reviewable error. While the Board might still come to the same conclusion as it did, procedural fairness dictates that it is necessary that these two issues be addressed again. 
 
 
 
 State protection 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  In light of my finding on lack of subjective fear, there is no need to canvass the issue of state protection. 
 
 
 
 Certified Questions 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The Applicant requested that I certify the following two questions: 
 
 
 
 1. Is a minor required to make a reasonable effort to seek state protection similar to that of an adult? 
 
 
 
 2. Is it necessary under s. 108 (4) of  
 IRPA 
  that the past "treatment" be atrocious and appalling? 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  As I came to the same conclusion as Justice Muldoon in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , above, the first question does not need to be certified. Furthermore, due to my finding that s. 108 is not applicable in this case, there is no reason to certify the second question. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Accordingly, this application will succeed. 
 
 
 
 ORDER 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  THIS COURT ORDERS that the decision of May 17, 2005 be set aside and the matter be sent back to the board for reconsideration by a differently constituted Board. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Angela E. McKay/vnh 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




