 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
O'Reilly, J.
August 18, 2005.
Counsel:
Brena Parnes, for the applicant;
Neeta Logsetty, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Waldman & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary.
[1]
O'Reilly, J.
: Ms. Maria Rita Teixeira Ramada was scheduled to be removed from Canada for Portugal in August 2004. Ms. Ramada asked an immigration enforcement officer to defer her removal while her application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration was pending. The officer refused. However, Ms. Ramada's removal was stayed by order of this Court to permit her to seek judicial review of the officer's decision.
[2]
Ms. Ramada argues that the officer failed to discharge her responsibility to consider her compelling personal circumstances and made serious errors of fact. She asks to have her request considered by another officer. While Ms. Ramada has raised a number of grounds for overturning the officer's decision, I find one of her arguments to be persuasive and need not consider the others. Therefore, I will grant this application for judicial review.
I. Issue
Did the officer ignore evidence or make serious factual errors when she decided not to defer Ms. Ramada's removal from Canada?
II. Analysis
[3]
Enforcement officers have a limited discretion to defer the removal of persons who have been ordered to leave Canada. Generally speaking, officers have an obligation to remove persons as soon as reasonably practicable (s. 48(2), Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27; set out in the attached Annex). However, consistent with that duty, officers can consider whether there are good reasons to delay removal. Valid reasons may be related to the person's ability to travel (e.g. illness or a lack of proper travel documents), the need to accommodate other commitments (e.g. school or family obligations), or compelling personal circumstances (e.g. humanitarian and compassionate considerations). ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) (QL)). It is clear, however, that the mere fact that a person has an outstanding application for humanitarian and compassionate relief is not a sufficient ground to defer removal. On the other hand, an officer must consider whether exigent personal circumstances, particularly those involving children, justify delay.
[4]
Here Ms. Ramada asked the officer to defer her removal for the following reasons:
- immediate removal would not be in the interests of her youngest child, who suffers from febrile seizures;
- Ms. Ramada has Type 2 diabetes and her removal might interfere with proper monitoring of her blood sugar level;
- Ms. Ramada was diagnosed with depression; her removal would worsen her mental state.
[5]
The officer is to be commended for her willingness to entertain Ms. Ramada's arguments and consider the evidence before her. She made detailed notes explaining her decision not to defer Ms. Ramada's removal from Canada. She took the additional precaution of seeking a medical opinion on Ms. Ramada's fitness to travel. She considered, at least in general terms, the best interests of Ms. Ramada's two Canadian-born children.
[6]
However, there was evidence before the officer that Ruthe, then three years old, was experiencing serious seizures of unknown cause. She was being treated at Sick Children's Hospital in Toronto. It was uncertain whether she could obtain appropriate treatment in Portugal. Yet, the officer did not consider Ruthe's circumstances. As a Canadian citizen, Ruthe was entitled to remain in Canada and take advantage of her health benefits here. She had no similar expectation or entitlement in Portugal. The officer was aware that Ms. Ramada's children were entitled to remain here, but she did not specifically consider the impact on Ruthe of leaving Canada, given Ms. Ramada's natural desire, as a single parent, to take her children with her to Portugal.
[7]
I have some reluctance in granting this application for judicial review, out of concern for imposing on enforcement officers an obligation to engage in an extensive analysis of the personal circumstances of persons subject to removal orders. Obviously, officers are not in a position to evaluate all of the evidence that might be relevant in an application for humanitarian and compassionate relief. Their role is important, but limited. In my view, it is only where they have overlooked an important factor, or seriously misapprehended the circumstances of a person to be removed, that their discretion should be second-guessed on judicial review.
[8]
In the circumstances, I will grant this application for judicial review. Neither party proposed a question of general importance for me to certify, and none is stated.
JUDGMENT
[9]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT IS that:
1. The application for judicial review is granted;
2. No question of general importance is stated.
Annex
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27
Enforceable removal order
48. (2) If a removal order is enforceable, the foreign national against whom it was made must leave Canada immediately and it must be enforced as soon as is reasonably practicable.
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés, L.C. 2001, ch. 27
Mesure de renvoi
48. (2) L'étranger visé par la mesure de renvoi exécutoire doit immédiatement quitter le territoire du Canada, la mesure devant être appliquée dès que les circonstances le permettent.
[End of document]