[1]
Joyal, J.
: The court is seized of an originating notice of motion filed by the applicant seeking declaratory and other relief against the defendants with respect to the Oak Hammock March "Conservation Centre" project near Winnipeg, Manitoba.
[2]
Included in the claim for relief by the applicant are certiorari and mandamus against the Federal Crown to submit the project to a review under the Environment Assessment and Review Process Guidelines Order, SOR 84/467 (E.A.R.P.) as well as an injunction against Ducks Unlimited from further use of a sewage lagoon in the Marsh until the E.A.R.P. review has been completed.
[3]
The involvement of federal authorities in the project appears to be by reason of a financial contribution of some $2 millions by the Minister of Western Economic Diversification to the project cost of $10 millions. The involvement of Ducks Unlimited is as initiator and developer of the Conservation Centre under licence from the provincial government in Manitoba, owner of the marshlands involved.
[4]
In response to the originating notice of motion, the respondent Ducks Unlimited has filed a preemptive motion to have the claim against it dismissed or stayed on the grounds that:
(1) the applicant has failed to disclose reasonable, or any grounds in support of the relief claimed;
(2) the court lacks jurisdiction to grant the relief sought;
(3) the issues raised are res judicata, the applicant having already been unsuccessful in a similar challenge before the Court of Queen's Bench and the Court of Appeal of Manitoba. [See
Friends of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.).]
[5]
The respondent Ducks Unlimited submits that the foregoing issues are strictly legal issues based on facts submitted by the applicant and are deserving of early determination by the court before going on with the merits of the applicant's originating notice. The respondent states that in order to enable it to respond to the merits of the case, considerable time, long efforts and great expense would be required of it. Expert evidence in defence of the voluminous evidence of the applicant would have to be supplied.
[6]
The applicant, in turn, states that there is no rule under the
Federal Court Rules
to provide for this. A proceeding by way of an originating notice of motion is meant to be disposed of summarily and there are no rules enabling a case of this nature to be split. The applicant refers to rule 419, which provides for dismissing all or part of a pleading, but it is noted, however, that the opening words of rule 419 appear to restrict its application to pleadings arising in an action and not in a proceeding by way of a motion.
[7]
After listening to able argument from counsel for the parties, including counsel for the respondent Ministers, I must conclude that the issue before me is purely procedural and that there is inherent jurisdiction in the court to exercise its discretion and to split the case in the manner suggested by the respondent. The jurisdictional issues raised are sufficiently clear and arguable as to merit their disposition in a preliminary way. They could be disposed of one way or the other at an early date and perhaps avoid the expenditure of an inordinate level of human or financial resources which any earlier disposition of the merits of the applicant's motion would create.
[8]
In effect, the substantive issues set out by the respondents, framed as a notice of motion, can be interpreted as a motion for directions as to the conduct of the proceedings with which the court is seized. Furthermore, were it not for the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  under rule 401 or rule 419. Finally, the same appears to be covered under the provision of rule 474. In any event, I should think that the disposition herein made is within the court's discretion to regulate its own proceedings.
[9]
Although I recognize that this might be a departure from the usual way of proceeding in originating notices of motion and, although I have full respect for the argument of applicant's counsel that all the issues, both jurisdictional and substantive should be argued together, I conclude that the administration of justice as well as, the interests of the parties, would be better served should the court proceed in two stages.
[10]
Since delivering brief oral reasons at the hearing of this motion on April 5, 1993, I have received a draft order to which all counsel agreed. Counsel have also agreed on the date for a hearing on the preliminary issue, namely June 8 and June 9, 1993, and which the court has fixed and reserved.
[11]
There is no order as to costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/sms
[End of document]