 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 In The Matter Of the Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, Chap. I-2, as amended, R.S.C. 1985 (4th Supp.), Chaps. 28 and 29; S.C. 1991-92, and regulations thereunder; and 
 
 
 
 In The Matter Of an application for landing made by  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 March 31, 1993. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The applicant applied for judicial review in order to compel the Minister to complete consideration of his application for landed immigrant status. The Minister was waiting for disposition of serious criminal charges against the applicant before ruling on his landing application. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, held that common sense dictated that the Minister's approach was proper. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1234 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Application for admission - Delays - The applicant was granted refugee status and applied for landed immigrant status - He was charged in Canada with aggravated assault, attempted murder and extortion - Because crimes committed both without and within Canada were bars to landing, the Minister decided to wait for disposition of the charges before ruling on his application - He sought an order that the Minister pro­ceed, submitting that mere charges were not a bar - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that common sense dictated that the Minister's approach was proper. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1745 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Immigration - Exclusion - Particular persons - Persons charged with crime - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1234 
 ]. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), consd. [para. 5]. 
 
 McKay and Minister of Municipal Affairs, Re (1973), 35 D.L.R.(3d) 627 (B.C.S.C.), consd. [para. 5]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 139 (F.C.A.), consd. [para. 5]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, sect. 19(1)(c), sect. 19(1)(c.1) [para. 10]; sect. 19(1)(d) [para. 7]; sect. 46.04(3) [para. 8]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Barbara Jackman, for the applicant; 
 
 No counsel for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Hoppe, Jackman, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 John C. Tait, Q.C., Deputy Attorney Gen­eral of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Ottawa, Ontario, before Muldoon, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on March 31, 1993. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Muldoon, J. 
 : The applicant seeks leave to apply for judicial review in order to compel the respondent's "officials to process and finalize his application for landing under the  
 Immigration Act 
 , such application having been submitted to the respondent's officials at ... Toronto ... and having been so submitted has not to this date [March 17, 1993] been finalized by the respondent's officials". 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicant arrived in Canada on August 15, 1989, just after his 19th birthday, and made a claim to be a refugee. His affidavit does not state from which state he seeks refugee, but he was born in Iran. The applicant's claim to Convention refugee status was determined affirmatively by a two-member refugee determination division tribunal (file T90-00777) on June 29, 1990, a copy of their written decision being appended as Exhibit "A" to his affidavit, sworn March 17, 1993. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Here is what the applicant, in that affidavit, swears is his problem and the basis of his complaint: 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "4. I was charged with criminal offences on August 1, 1991. I am presently facing three charges, aggravated assault, attempt murder and extortion. My criminal charges are pending and are set for trial March 22, 1993. 
 
 
 
 "5. I was called into the Toronto Central Canada Immigration Centre at 443 University Avenue on August 13, 1991 for landing in Canada as a permanent resident. I was in custody on a criminal hold at that time and was not able to make this appointment. I was called in again for an appointment on September 13, 1991 and annexed hereto as Exhibit 'B' to this my affidavit is a true copy of the call-in notice. I was not granted permanent residence on that date because the immigration officer advised me that it was not possible to land me at that time because I was facing criminal charges. 
 
 
 
 "6. Since that time, on the two occasions that I requested that my case be finalized by immigration officials, on November 14, 1991 and on November 18, 1992, when I attended to extend my work permit, I was told both times by the immigration officer involved that I had to wait and could not be landed at that time. In June of 1992, I spoke to an immigration officer by telephone because I was concerned about the matter. I was advised at that time that I had to wait and, in fact, the person I talked to would not put me through to the officer who actually had my file. I called one other time between November 1991 and November 1992 and the officer I spoke to told me that I had charges of my file and that there was nothing he could do for me." 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Also in support of this application is lodged the affidavit of Terri Jackman, "a paralegal in the offices of" the applicant's solicitors. She swears before someone whose signature is illegible, thus: 
 
 
 
 "5. I understood further from my discussion with Mr. Doyle that the Immigration Commission did not land Mr. Taei because he was facing criminal charges in Canada. It is my understanding now that the Immigration Commission officials did not request that the security clearance be updated in order to enable Mr. Taei to become a permanent resident now until after the criminal charges are disposed of by the criminal courts." 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The applicant's solicitors have submitted in support of this leave application, the following jurisprudence, which the court has considered: 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) 
 
 
 
 Re McKay and Minister of Municipal Affairs 
  (1973), 35 D.L.R.(3d) 627 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 139 (F.C.A.) 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Bad faith, as alleged by the applicant, is easy to say, but must be strictly proved. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  At present s. 19(1)(d) of the  
 Act 
  provides: 
 
 
 
 "19(1) No person shall be granted admission [entry or landing] who is a member of any of the following classes: 
 
 
 
 (a) persons who there are reasonable and probable to believe will 
 
 
 
 (i) commit one or more offences punishable by way of indictment under any Act of Parliament [i.e. the Criminal Code] ..." 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Section 46.04 of the  
 Act 
 , in subsection (3), now provides: 
 
 
 
 "(3)  
 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act 
 , but subject to subsections (3.1) and (8), an immigration officer ... shall grant landing to the applicant ... if the immigration officer  
 is satisfied that neither the applicant nor ... is 
  a person described in paragraph 19(1) ... (d) ... or a person who has been convicted under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of 
 
 
 
 (a) more than six months has been imposed; or 
 
 
 
 (b) five years or more may be imposed," (emphasis not in original text) 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The rule of law does not require that statutes be read and interpreted in a robotic mindless manner. Common sense has not been abolished either by the  
 Charter 
  or by statute. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Section 19 of the  
 Immigration Act 
  in subs. (1)(c) and (c.1) bars admission to Canada of 
 
 
 
 "(c) persons who have been convicted in Canada of an offence that may be punishable under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of  
 10 years 
  or more; 
 
 
 
 "(c.1) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe 
 
 
 
 (i) have been convicted outside Canada of an offence that, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence that may be punishable ... by ...  
 10 years 
  or more." (emphasis not in original text) 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Now the applicant has not yet, if ever, been convicted of any offence so far as the material reveals, but he is charged under the  
 Criminal Code 
  of the following offences bearing, upon conviction, these maximum terms of imprisonment: 
 
 
 
 1. aggravated assault s. 268(2) 14 years 
 
 
 
 2. attempted murder s. 239  life 
 
 
 
 3. extortion    s. 346(1.1) life. 
 
 
 
 In order so to be charged, an accuser must swear that he or she has reasonable grounds to believe that the accused (the applicant) has committed those crimes. Now, in the  
 Immigration Act 
 , an immigration officer can, or must, bar a person from admission if such person has been convicted of a serious offence (punishable by 10 years or longer imprisonment) in Canada or outside Canada or is reasonably believed to have committed such offence outside of Canada; and may or must equally bar one who is reasonably believed to be going to commit such an offence punishable by way of indictment in Canada, as provided in s. 19(1)(d)(i). 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  What, if anything, ought to be done about one who is reasonably believed to have committed three serious offences in Canada? Does a lacuna in the statutory text exact a lacuna in common sense? Hardly. However, the applicant here must be accorded the presumption of innocence, or truth to speak, nonguilt. That presumption, in avoidance of acting upon a doubt, exacts that the respondent do nothing but stay the applicant's request for admission, just as if it were crystallized in amber. It would be against public policy to go heedlessly ahead and grant it; and it would be contrary to the presumption of innocence to bar the applicant forever. If he be acquitted of those serious charges, the respondent should then proceed with granting admission. If the applicant be convicted of any one of them, he will have truly disqualified himself from landing. Clearly he cannot succeed on judicial review for mandamus, as he seeks and hopes. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Leave to institute judicial review as sought must be denied. 
 
 
 
 Order 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Leave is denied. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/sms 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



