Relief Requested
[1]
Strayer, J.
: In essence these are both applications for orders quashing the respective decisions of immigration officers which determined that the applicant in each case had insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds for the exercise by the Governor-in-Council of his discretion under s. 114(2) of the Immigration Act [see footnote 1] to allow the applicants to apply from within Canada for permanent residence; and for orders compelling the respondent or her officials to reconsider the cases of the applicants on their merit in respect of the exercise of that discretion.
[2]
These two applications were set down for hearing along with four others, all involving similar remedies concerning the exercise of discretion under s. 114(2). In respect of each of those other cases, court files number T-2862-90, T-3082-90, T-2668-90, and T-2882-90, it was clear from the record that subsequent to the launching of proceedings in this court the respondent had undertaken to grant new interviews to each of the applicants respectively, the effect being to reconsider on the basis of a new interview the negative decisions previously taken by immigration officers as to the exercise of discretion under s. 114(2). It was apparently agreed among counsel for all six applicants that the six applications would be heard together in this court, partly on common evidence and on common arguments. I declined to hear any of the four cases in which the respondent had already agreed to new interviews because in my view those cases had become moot. I subsequently dismissed all those applications, granting to the applicants party and party costs incurred up to the time of the proposed court hearing. I also declined to consider evidence which counsel sought to introduce in relation to those cases or in relation to other practices or decisions of the respondent and her officers which did not directly pertain to the two applications in question before me. There was no agreement among the parties on a common set of facts and counsel for the respondent assured me that there was no agreement that any decision on any one of the cases should apply to the others, unlike the situation in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  absence of such an agreement, to seek to have judicial review of a given decision of an immigration officer on the basis of evidence concerning the decisional processes of other officers in other cases, or on evidence of their general practices. There is no procedure for references on general questions of law or fact in this court. While the court may, where the parties are in agreement on the facts and a proper order has been made to that effect, decide questions of law which may be determinative of one or more cases, no such requirements were met in this case. The facts and issues to be considered here will therefore be those strictly relevant to the two applications still before me as described in the styles of cause heading these reasons.
Facts
[3]
Mr. Vidal has been in Canada since January 1987, and is a refugee claimant in the Refugee Backlog Clearance Programme. He attended for an interview at the Mississauga Backlog Immigration Office on May 30, 1990, accompanied by Vilma Filici, a law clerk, and by Moin Ashan, a legal assistant, both from the office of his counsel. He had been given due notice of the interview which was for the purpose of determining whether the interviewing officer could recommend him for the exercise of discretion by the Governor-in-Council in favour of the applicant under s. 114(2). At the time of the interview the applicant's advisers provided the interviewing officer, Michael Pearl, with written submissions on behalf of Mr. Vidal as well as taking an active part in the interview. By letter of August 8, 1990, Mr. Pearl advised the applicant that it had been determined that his case did not warrant referral to the Governor-in-Council either for reasons of public policy or for humanitarian and compassionate considerations.
[4]
Mr. Dadwah and his wife are citizens of Trinidad and Tobago and arrived in Canada in October 1988. They are refugee claimants and also part of the Refugee Backlog. They were invited by letter of July 17, 1990, to attend interviews on August 17, 1990, at the Immigration Office in Mississauga to determine whether sufficient humanitarian and compassionate reasons exist to permit their application for permanent residence to be processed from within Canada. They were accompanied at the interview by their counsel who also submitted a six-page written submission to the interviewing officer. Counsel indicated in an affidavit that she had actively participated in the interview. By letter of August 17th the immigration officer, Luz Marina Nunez, advised Mr. Dadwah that it had been determined that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds upon which to accept an application for permanent residence from within Canada.
[5]
In the respective notices of motion these decisions are attacked on essentially two bases: a denial of fairness in the procedure of the interview; and an inherent illegality in the decisions refusing recommendations for favourable treatment under s. 114(2) on the grounds that (1) the exercise of discretion by the interviewing officers under s. 114(2) was improperly fettered either by the guidelines under which they are operating, by instructions from their superiors, or by selfimposed restraints; and (2) the structure for the exercise of discretion under s. 114(2) is unlawful in that it involves an improper delegation of the authority of the Governor-in-Council, and the unauthorized use of guidelines by the Minister which guidelines are also intrinsically unlawful because they are in conflict with the Act and the Regulations and are intrinsically unreasonable.
[6]
At the hearing before the court, counsel for these applicants specifically confirmed that they were no longer relying on the ground of denial of fairness, the only issues being the alleged fettering of discretion and unlawfulness of the system by which the discretion of the Governor-in-Council is exercised.
Conclusions
[7]
It is first important to quote s. 114(2) of the Immigration Act.
"114(2) The Governor-in-Council may by regulation exempt any person from any regulation made under subsection (1) or otherwise facilitate the admission of any person where the Governor-in-Council is satisfied that the person should be exempted from that regulation or the person's admission should be facilitated for reasons of public policy or due to the existence of compassionate or humanitarian consideration."
It will be noted in each case that the decision complained of is that of an immigration officer, a decision not to recommend to the Minister that she recommend to the Governor-in-Council that a regulation be adopted under this subsection exempting the applicant from various requirements of the Act and the Regulations or facilitating his admission notwithstanding the requirement in s. 9(1) of the Act that every application for a visa must be made before entering Canada. Neither of the present applicants had complied with that requirement before coming to Canada.
[8]
There are a few basic propositions which are, in my view, self-evident and which should be kept in mind in dealing with these issues.
(1) In s. 114(2) Parliament has authorized the Governor-in-Council to make exceptions to the rules found in the Act and in the Regulations. There is therefore nothing inconsistent with the Act in the Governor-in-Council creating such exceptions by regulation.
(2) The exceptions so made are for the benefit of those in whose favour they are made and do not detract from the normal application of the general rules to all others. Those who complain that they have not been made the beneficiary of a regulation adopted under s. 114(2) are in effect complaining that they have not received a special benefit.
(3) The discretion conferred under s. 114(2) is conferred on the Governor-in-Council, not on the immigration officer who conducts the interview. The latter reports to the Minister with a recommendation [see footnote 3]. By the normal processes of cabinet government the Minister of Employment and Immigration in turn would review the report and recommendation and, if in agreement, make a recommendation to the Governor-in-Council for the exercise of his discretion under subsection 114(2) [see footnote 4].
(4) I can see nothing in the law or the evidence to suggest that either the Minister or the Governor-in-Council is precluded from exercising her or his discretion in favour of a claimant where special submissions are made on his behalf directly to the Minister or the Governor-in-Council either in the absence of any recommendation from an immigration officer or despite a negative decision of the immigration officer. It is recognized, of course, that normally action is not taken under s. 114(2) in the absence of a favourable recommendation from an immigration officer.
(5) The two grounds for favourable action under s. 114(2) which are in issue in the present cases, public policy and compassionate or humanitarian considerations, are of disparate character. While it is plausible to say, as seems to have been implicit in the Yhap case [see footnote 5] that the words "humanitarian and compassionate" have some kind of objective meaning intended by Parliament which must not be artificially narrowed through the fettering of the discretion of immigration officers in applying those words, the same cannot be said for the term "public policy". Subject to certain very broad limitations, the content of "public policy" must be defined by those having the authority to fix public policy and the political responsibility for its content.
(6) The court should not interfere with the exercise of discretion by an officer or body authorized by statute to exercise that discretion unless it is clear that the discretion has been exercised in bad faith or on grounds unrelated to the purposes for which the discretion is granted [see footnote 6].
[9]
Prior to the Yhap decision the relevant guidelines for the guidance of immigration officers in making recommendations under s. 114(2) for persons such as the applicants read in part as follows:
"2. Humanitarian and Compassionate Review Criteria
"
Initial Review
"1. Individuals who are members of official delegations, athletic teams or cultural groups, and other persons, who by seeking to remain in Canada, so embarrass their government as to leave themselves open to severe sanctions should they return home.
"2. Exceptional circumstances that could be resolved by the exercise of compassionate judgment. This refers to family dependency situations where close family members of a Canadian resident would suffer hardship if forced to return home to obtain an immigrant visa. Hardship does not include financial penalty or inconvenience."
It is significant to note that these were the only "humanitarian and compassionate" grounds indicated in the guidelines to be relevant to the refugee backlog population. Jerome, A.C.J., took the view that they were being interpreted by the immigration officers as excluding for humanitarian and compassionate consideration any claimant who was not a member of an official delegation or of an athletic team or cultural group, and who was not a close family member of a Canadian resident. He concluded that this interpretation unduly fettered the discretion of immigration officers, implicit in s. 11492), to decide for themselves what are "humanitarian and compassionate" considerations in a given case, giving those words their natural meaning. He recognized, however, that guidelines would be permissible so long as they were clearly intended to be a statement of "general policy" or "rough rules of thumb" and not an exhaustive definition, binding on immigration officers, of what are humanitarian and compassionate considerations. While expressly declining to adjudicate upon the adequacy of the guidelines for humanitarian and compassionate review then set out in chapter 9 of the Immigration Manual in respect of other persons seeking permanent residence status in Canada, he observed that those guidelines appeared to constitute a permissible statement of general policy.
[10]
I would observe in passing that it must follow as a corollary of the reasoning of Jerome, A.C.J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that an applicant cannot complain if an immigration officer fails or refuses to follow the Minister's guidelines. Nor can he complain if an immigration officer applies any factor in lieu of those in the guidelines as long as this is done in good faith and the factor is not wholly irrelevant to any conceivable view of humanitarian and compassionate considerations. Further, it is for the officer to decide if he is convinced of the truth of an applicant's assertions, unless perhaps he makes findings of fact which are clearly without regard to any material before him. It is not for the court to sit in appeal on his findings of fact or his weighing of the various factors.
[11]
After the Yhap decision held the then existing humanitarian and compassionate guidelines for backlog refugees, as quoted above, to be an invalid fettering of the discretion exercisable under s. 114(2), the Minister adopted new guidelines on March 20, 1990. It is these guidelines which are of central importance in the present cases. Generally speaking these guidelines appear to be statements of general policy and similar in tone to that of Chapter 9 of the Manual which was viewed with approval by Jerome, A.C.J., in the Yhap case. It will also be noted that these guidelines treat separately the humanitarian and compassionate grounds and the "public policy situations". Key passages of the new guidelines are as follows, with my emphasis indicated in italicized passages.
"
Exercise Of Discretion
"... In short, immigration officers may decide which cases warrant a
recommendation
to the Governor-in-Council for an exemption due to the existence of humanitarian and compassionate grounds or for reasons of public policy and also decide, on behalf of the Minister, that special relief is not warranted in other cases.
"The proper exercise of discretion not only benefits our applicants, but it is also consistent with the objectives of the Immigration Act in upholding Canada's humanitarian traditions.
Officers are therefore encouraged to use their good judgment
in applying discretion.
"It is implicit in the
exercise of any discretion
, whether that of the
immigration officer
who makes the initial recommendation, the
Minister
who makes the recommendation to the Governor-in-Council, or the
Governor-in-Council who, in law, makes the decision, that decisions are made on a case by case basis
. It is important therefore, that officers realize that the guidelines that follow
are not intended as hard and fast rules
. They will not answer all eventualities, nor can they be framed to do so. Officers are
expected to consider carefully all aspects of cases
, use their best judgment, and make the appropriate recommendations.
.....
"Discretionary authority, as it relates to humanitarian and compassionate grounds, is described in greater detail below under Definition of Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds. Situations relating to public policy are described in the following section on Public Policy Situations. The two areas are not mutually exclusive, but as they involve different assessments, they have been grouped separately.
.....
"It is recognized that
not all officers will react identically
, every time, to any given situation. To ensure absolute consistency in recommendations, it would be necessary to provide guidelines which answer every eventuality. This is not possible, nor even desirable,
as it would negate an officer's discretionary authority
under A114(2) as noted by Justice Jerome in the Yhap decision. In order to maintain an acceptable level of consistency, the following guidelines will apply.
"
Definition Of Humanitarian And Compassionate Grounds
"Humanitarian and compassionate grounds
exist
when unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship would be caused to a person seeking consideration. A humanitarian and compassionate review is a
case by case response
whereby officers are expected to consider carefully
all aspects of a situation, use their best judgment
and make an
informed
recommendation. For example, in dealing with requests for consideration from within Canada, officers should ask themselves: 'What would a reasonable person do in such a situation?'
"To assist officers in identifying situations which may warrant a humanitarian and compassionate response, the examples outlined below have been provided.
They are by no means exhaustive
. For example,
all of the circumstances described under Public Policy situations may be considered when making a humanitarian and compassionate assessment
. While a person may not meet the guidelines described under Public Policy Situations, the officer may feel that on balance there exist humanitarian and compassionate considerations which would lead to a positive humanitarian and compassionate recommendation.
Economic and establishment situations alone would not normally constitute grounds for a positive humanitarian and compassionate recommendation
.
"
Situations Involving Family
"These situations refer to any family situation other than those involving spouses (which are described under Public Policy Situations), e.g., parents, children and other relatives or family members of Canadian residents. This may also apply to a person, not necessarily related by blood to the Canadian resident, but who is a de facto part of the family. The requirement to leave Canada and to apply abroad in the normal manner could result in undue hardship because of the would be immigrant's financial or emotional dependency on family in Canada.
"Officers should examine considerations such as the reason why the person did not apply abroad as required by A9(1), the degree of independence exhibited before coming to Canada, the existence of family or other support in the home country, the physical capability to travel, etc.
....
"
Severe Sanctions Or Inhumane Treatment In Country Of Origin
"Consideration should be given where there exists a special situation in the person's home country, and undue hardship would likely result from removal. Such persons might face severe government sanctions on returning home because of things they have said or done while in Canada, e.g., while in Canada, a visitor has made public condemnatory comments on the policies of his/her government or has publicly embarrassed a repressive government. Examples include members of official delegations, athletic teams or cultural groups who may have spoken out against their government or whose attempt to remain in Canada could in itself result in official sanctions upon return home.
"Others may warrant consideration because of their personal circumstances in relation to current laws and practices in their country of origin. Such persons could reasonably expect unduly harsh or inhumane treatment in their country should they be removed. In these cases there should be strong reasons to believe that the person will face a life-threatening situation in his or her homeland as a direct result of the political or social situation in that country. Such situations are more likely to occur in countries with repressive governments or those experiencing civil strife or at war.
"Officers will consider the facts of the case and recommend
what they believe is reasonable in the particular situation
. The onus is on applicants to satisfy the officer that (a) a particular situation exists in their country and that, (b) their
personal circumstances
in relation to that situation warrant positive discretion.
"
Public Policy Situations
"A114(2) also provides for discretion for reasons of public policy. These are situations that warrant consideration from within Canada as a result of a
policy direction taken by the Commission in the interests of the Immigration Program and not necessarily because officers feel that humanitarian grounds exist
. Persons dealt with under 'Public Policy', would
normally
be expected to fall into one of the categories listed below. While a person may not warrant a positive recommendation under public policy considerations, there may exist humanitarian and compassionate grounds which warrant favourable consideration.
....
"
Illegal De Facto Residents Policy
"
Persons who meet the definition of an illegal de facto resident may be considered from within Canada. Illegal de facto residents are administratively defined
as those persons who have
not
previously come to our attention and who, although they have no legal status in Canada, have been here so long and are so established that, in fact if not in law, they have their residence in Canada and not abroad. These persons will have gone 'underground' and will not have come previously to official immigration attention, e.g., as refugee claimants, members of the refugee claims backlog or persons previously ordered removed. Such persons would have severed their ties with their home country and would undergo undue hardship if they were required to leave Canada in order to seek a visa to return (legally) as permanent residents."
I am satisfied that these guidelines adequately convey to immigration officers that, particularly in respect of humanitarian and compassionate considerations, the guidelines are not to be regarded as exhaustive and definitive. It is emphasized and reemphasized that officers are expected to use their best judgment. I believe they amount to "general policy" or "rough rules of thumb" which Jerome, A.C.J., recognized as permissible in the Yhap case. I would go farther than Jerome, A.C.J., and say that such guidelines are not only permissible but highly desirable in the circumstances. No doubt when Parliament conferred the power under s. 114(2) on the Governor-in-Council to make exceptions to the requirements of the Act and the Regulations it expected the Governor-in-Council to exercise that discretion with some sort of consistency throughout the country and not purely arbitrarily or by whim. More particularly, by the principles of parliamentary government the Governor-in-Council must be responsible to Parliament for the exercise of his discretion. As the Governor-in-Council is in the vast majority of cases dependent on the recommendations of immigration officers, as approved by the Minister, for the exercise of his discretion it is highly desirable that immigration officers have some sort of guidance as to what factors the Minister thinks important in making recommendations to the Governor-in-Council in this respect. If the net effect of this is to give more importance to some factors, without necessarily excluding other factors, it appears to me to be a sensible way for the Minister and the Governor-in-Council to bring some consistency into the exercise of powers under s. 114(2) and to discharge their political responsibilities to Parliament.
[12]
I will now deal with the particular complaints of the two applicants herein concerning the decisions of the respective immigration officers in their cases. I will deal separately with the alleged fettering of discretion in respect of humanitarian and compassionate considerations, the alleged fettering of discretion in respect of public policy factors, and the alleged invalidity of the system under which such decisions are taken. In trying to deal with the specifics of the two cases properly before me, I have had some difficulty because counsel for the applicants dedicated most of their efforts to seeking to demonstrate that the entire system was defective. I have tried as best I can to extract from the generality of their arguments and evidence the particular complaints concerning these two applicants.
Fettering Of Discretion: Humanitarian And Compassionate Considerations
[13]
(a)
Economic Factors
- The guidelines state that:
"Economic and establishment situations alone would not normally constitute grounds for a positive humanitarian and compassionate recommendation."
I find nothing in this statement which improperly fetters the discretion of immigration officers in considering the fact that refugee claimants have been in Canada for a time, may have got jobs and acquired some property, and thus demonstrated some ability to adjust to Canada or perhaps a relative inability to achieve the same economic standards should they return to their country of origin. The statement in the guideline is not exhaustive, using the expression "would not normally". The discretion is left to the officer, but with the indication that he should have some good reason for giving much weight to economic and settlement factors as "humanitarian" or "compassionate" ground.
[14]
It was suggested in these cases, however, that the immigration officers in question had indicated that economic factors or a successful establishment in Canada were not to be taken into account, either because of instructions from their superiors or because of their own "self-fettering". There is some conflict in the evidence on these points but I am not satisfied that these officers were doing other than following the spirit of the guidelines. It is true that in the cross-examination of Michael Pearl, the interviewing officer in the Vidal case, there was at one point the following exchange:
"Q. Are economic factors by themselves enough?
A. Not enough, no."
But read in the broader context of the cross-examination, he answered, on other occasions when asked if economic establishment would be sufficient, "No, by itself normally, no." At another point he said, in answer to a question whether economic establishment is not a predominant factor he answered "No". Further, in his affidavit he denied that he had received any instructions with respect to the manner in which he was to treat economic factors beyond the statement in the guidelines as quoted above. In general the evidence in both these cases indicates that the interviewing officers did not refuse to consider economic and establishment factors but gave them little weight in the circumstances. Considering that, as one of the officers pointed out, such refugee claimants are given work permits and many of them find work while awaiting (some times for lengthy periods) the consideration of their refugee claims, it cannot be assumed that this by itself should be regarded as a compelling humanitarian or compassionate ground for the exercise of discretion under s. 114(2): otherwise a large portion of refugee claimants would be entitled to admission from within Canada simply by filing a refugee claim and getting a job. Therefore immigration officers who give little weight to these factors cannot, in my view, be considered to be improperly exercising discretion on behalf of the Governor-in-Council.
[15]
(b)
Situations involving family
- It appears to me that the guidelines as quoted above under this heading leave adequate discretion to an immigration officer in deciding whether to recommend that a claimant be allowed to apply for permanent residence status from within Canada rather than being required to return to his country of origin to do so. The factors suggested for consideration appear to me to be quite germane to the proper exercise of that discretion and in no way exclude an officer from considering any family ties in Canada where financial or emotional hardship would result if the claimant were obliged to return to his country of origin. The specific language of the guidelines must always be read subject to their introductory words that they "are not intended as hard and fast rules".
[16]
In the Vidal case, however, it is complained on behalf of the applicant that the immigration officer, Mr. Pearl, took too narrow a view of relevant family ties. Mr. Vidal has no family in Canada other than his wife, son and daughter all of whom are included in his refugee claim. His wife has two sisters and a brother in Canada. According to the affidavit of Moin Ahsan the "legal assistant" in the office representing Mr. Vidal, Mr. Pearl at the interview of Mr. Vidal
"indicated that the existence of siblings of the applicant's wife was not a factor that he considered relevant in his determination."
Mr. Pearl in his affidavit says:
"In general, I regard family class relatives as more important than non-family class relatives. In some cases, more distant relatives are significant, particularly when combined with other factors such as civil strife in the country of origin that is likely to impact on the applicant if he returns and they are prepared to act as guarantors. As with all factors, it depends on the circumstances, and the individual facts."
I can find in this nothing more than a disagreement as to how much weight the immigration officer was giving to the presence in Canada of the applicant's sisters-in-law and brother-in-law. A factor regarded as carrying no weight might well, in an interview, be described as "not relevant" - if those were the words he used.
[17]
In the Dadwah case the interviewing officer was told that the applicant's wife (also being interviewed) had two sisters, an aunt, and several cousins in Canada. This did not satisfy the officer that humanitarian and compassionate reasons existed for not requiring the Dadwahs to return to their home country before applying for admission. In her affidavit the interviewing officer says that it is her practice, where relatives in Canada such as these are outside the narrow "family class", to look for evidence of "dependancy" (presumably, of the applicant on relatives resident in Canada). Although reference was made to this in argument, the applicant Dadwah does not seem to base a specific complaint on this position and I find nothing therein to suggest an improper "fettering" of discretion. The officer made a value judgment which as far as we know was not made for any improper or irrelevant reason. If an officer has a discretion, as the applicants insist, then she is entitled to exercise it on the basis of any relevant rationale that she genuinely thinks appropriate. It is untenable to contend that every time an officer makes a decision on the basis of some factor she thinks appropriate, she has thereby "fettered her discretion" by not relying on some other factor that she genuinely does not think appropriate or of sufficient weight in the circumstances.
[18]
Counsel for the applicants in these cases sought to broaden the attack on the practices of the Employment and Immigration Commission in family cases by producing some rather tenuous evidence that common law relationships are not recognized by immigration officers as involving a "family situation" giving rise to humanitarian or compassionate considerations. While such an attitude if adhered to without regard to particular circumstances might well unduly fetter the discretion of an immigration officer, there was no such element present in the two cases before me. I made it clear I was not going to be drawn into conducting a general inquiry into the conduct of the Commission under s. 114(2).
[19]
(c)
Severe Sanctions or Inhumane Treatment in Country of Origin
- The section of the guidelines under this heading appears to me to be adequately general so as not to inhibit immigration officers from considering any "undue hardship" which a claimant might experience in going home, and I find nothing wrong with the concept of "undue hardship" as the test for whether the actual reentry to one's country of origin should not, on humanitarian or compassionate grounds, be required. Following this broad proposition in the guidelines are several examples of such hardship but they do not purport to be exhaustive and the immigration officer is left with ample discretion.
[20]
In the Vidal case there appears to be a complaint that the immigration officer did not have proper regard to statements that Mr. Vidal had been arrested and tortured in Chile in the past. A statement to this effect was provided in a letter from counsel for the applicant with no more particulars than the following:
"As you are undoubtedly aware Mr. Vidal was subjected to detention and torture and was branded by the Chilean government as a subversive agent."
There is directly conflicting evidence as to whether some certificate was produced and filed concerning his past arrest. The evidence also indicates that the immigration officer asked the applicant and his counsel if they had any more submissions or information on this or other points and nothing further was forthcoming. In his negative conclusion it is obvious that the immigration officer did not find Mr. Vidal's allegations to be compelling or determinative. But I am satisfied he considered them and it is not for me to sit on appeal from his conclusions with respect thereto.
[21]
In the Dadwah case counsel had presented a lengthy written submission to the immigration officer describing, among other things, the difficulties that Mr. and Mrs. Dadwah had experienced in their community in Trinidad prior to coming to Canada in October 1988. Briefly described, these alleged difficulties arose from the fact that the Dadwahs, being of Indian descent and operating a store in a small community where the police officers were black (and in their view involved in illegal activity), suffered from police persecution and brutality. They also suffered regular thefts from the store which the police did nothing to investigate or stop. It is not disputed that the immigration officer read this submission and discussed this problem with the Dadwahs to some degree. It is also clear that she did not accept this submission as justifying a finding that the Dadwahs would suffer undue hardship if they returned to Trinidad. It is unclear, however, on what ground she reached that conclusion. According to an affidavit sworn by Michele Mannel who acted as counsel for the applicants at the interview, the immigration officer Luz Marina Nunez did not find their uncorroborated statements to be adequate proof of the facts they alleged. But Ms. Mannel was also definite in her affidavit that Ms. Nunez said that
"the incidents suffered by Mr. and Mrs. Dadwah would not be covered under the Commission's guidelines."
and that
"The officer's only attempt to explain her reasons for the refusal was an oral statement that the applicants' case did not fall under the Commission's guidelines."
For her part, Ms. Nunez is not clear as to what she said at the interview as to her reasons for rejecting the claim. She says
"I recall indicating to the applicant and his wife that I did not think that he and his wife made out a basis for being fearful about returning to Trinidad."
She does not specifically deny having said that she was rejecting their claim based on the hardship they would suffer in Trinidad on the grounds that the particular facts were not covered by the guidelines. In fairness to her she may have forgotten what if anything was said about this. But given the precision of the affidavit of Ms. Mannel and the generality of the affidavit of Ms. Nunez on this point, I have reached the conclusion that Ms. Nunez probably did state that the rather unusual circumstances suffered by the Dadwahs in Trinidad were not sufficient grounds for a favourable decision because they did not come within the guidelines. It was of course open to her to reject those allegations on the basis of credibility, and this court could not review such a finding if made in good faith. She could have rejected this aspect of the applicant's case on the grounds that in her view it did not involve a situation where humanitarian and compassionate considerations were relevant, if she honestly reached that conclusion. But she was not entitled to reject the case simply because it was not covered by the guidelines. Following the principles laid down by Jerome, A.C.J., in the Yhap case, I can only reiterate that the guidelines must be regarded as stating a "general policy" or "rough rules of thumb" but cannot validly be treated as providing an exhaustive definition of the circumstances in which humanitarian and compassionate considerations can be found. The decision respecting the applicant Outar Dadwah must therefore be set aside.
[22]
While the argument of these cases from time to time strayed into other areas where, it was suggested, immigration officers are allegedly fettering their own discretion in humanitarian and compassionate matters or consider themselves to be so fettered by instructions, I was unable to find any evidence of such practices in respect of the cases properly before me.
Fettering Of Discretion: Public Policy
[23]
Counsel took issue in argument with one of the policies listed under the heading of "Public Policy Situations" in the guidelines, namely the "Illegal De Facto Residents Policy" which is quoted above. The basis of the argument appeared to be that it was unreasonable or illegal to prevent immigration officers from considering those in the Refugee Backlog Programme as eligible for the same treatment as "Illegal De Facto Residents".
[24]
To the extent that this is an argument that immigration officers should have the discretion, on public policy grounds, to treat those who do not come within the administrative definition of "Illegal De Facto Residents" as if they do, I think it is untenable. In my view there is a fundamental difference between humanitarian and compassionate grounds referred to in s. 114(2), where Jerome, A.C.J., has held in the Yhap case that there can be no fettering of discretion of immigration officers, and the public policy ground also referred to in s. 114(2). As I have suggested earlier, the rationale of Yhap is based on the proposition that the words "humanitarian and compassionate" have some objective meaning which each immigration officer is entitled to interpret. But the term "public policy" has no objective content and must be defined by those having authority to define public policy. I cannot accept that every immigration officer has the right and the obligation to define his own "public policy". That is surely a matter for the Governor-in-Council to determine in the exercise of his authority under s. 114(2) and it is perfectly legitimate for the Minister to indicate through guidelines what she will recommend to the Governor-in-Council as "public policy" (based, presumably, on what the Governor-in-Council is likely to accept). The guidelines may therefore prescribe the situations in which, for reasons of public policy, the Governor-in-Council will by regulation exempt an individual from other regulations or otherwise facilitate his admission.
[25]
By making special arrangements for illegal de facto residents, the Minister and the Governor-in-Council are not taking any rights away from anyone. They are simply identifying a certain category of person whose admission may be facilitated without the necessity of considering whether there exist humanitarian and compassionate grounds. This in no way fetters the discretion of the immigration officers in respect of determining whether humanitarian and compassionate grounds exist in respect of those who do not specially qualify as illegal de facto residents.
[26]
It might also be noted that in the facts of the two cases in question there appears to be no issue of the application of this public policy. The submissions of counsel to the respective immigration officers do not appear to raise any claim in this respect and in the decision in the Dadwah case there is not even any mention of public policy grounds. I have considered the point only because counsel seemed to be implying that the discretion of the officers was somehow fettered by the Illegal De Facto Residents Policy.
Illegality Of System For Administering Section 114(2)
[27]
Counsel for the applicants contend that the present system by which decisions are made as to the exercise of the discretion granted under s. 114(2) is invalid because: it involves an unlawful delegation of the powers of the Governor-in-Council; the Minister has no authority to make such guidelines; the Minister has no policy-making authority under the Act; the guidelines are inconsistent with the objectives and purposes of the Immigration Act; and the public policy guidelines are unreasonable. I believe that these contentions can be dealt with briefly.
[28]
The present scheme by which immigration officers gather facts and make recommendations in respect of the exercise of the powers under s. 114(2) has already been approved expressly in the Jiminez-Perez case [see footnote 7], in the Federal Court of Appeal and implicitly in the Supreme Court of Canada.
[29]
One of the surprising contentions of Ms. Jackman, on behalf of the applicants, was that the Governor-in-Council himself should hear all such applications for favourable treatment under s. 114(2). That this is completely impossible is well demonstrated by the evidence which shows that in a period from the summer of 1989 to October 26, 1990, there were some 39,879 such reviews on humanitarian and compassionate grounds alone. Recognizing that a small percentage of those reviews were duplications after the Yhap decision, which arguably would not have been necessary had the Governor-in-Council been conducting all such reviews, it is inconceivable that Parliament intended the Governor-in-Council to focus on each application. An extensive delegation system must be implied [see footnote 8].
[30]
I believe that the role of the Minister and her guidelines is also consistent with the intention of Parliament in this respect. It is accepted practice that when an Act contains a provision for the making of delegated legislation such as s. 114(2), the Minister designated as responsible for that Act is responsible for bringing forward any recommendations to the Governor-in-Council for the exercise of that power. The Minister of Employment and Immigration is designated as the Minister for the purposes of this Act [see footnote 9]. But the nature of the problem is such, given the vast numbers of applicants for special treatment under s. 114(2) and their geographic dispersal, that the Minister must rely on her immigration officers to study the applications, interview the applicants, and make recommendations to the Minister as to which case she should recommend to the Governor-in-Council for favourable treatment. As I have indicated earlier, it is not only permissible but highly desirable that the Minister try to assure that there is some consistency of treatment of these applications by those at the operating level and this she has done by the issue of guidelines. It is accepted that those guidelines may not fetter the discretion of immigration officers to consider any factor which could arguably be embraced by the terms "humanitarian and compassionate", but it is quite in order for the Minister on behalf of the Governor-in-Council to indicate definitively to immigration officers what elements of public policy she is prepared to recommend to the Governor-in-Council as a basis for favorable action. It is surely within the expectation of Parliament and of most Canadians that the Minister will try to ensure that the discretionary powers granted by s. 114(2) are exercised with some coherence and consistency and that in matters of public policy Parliament can rightly look to the Governor-in-Council and the Minister to be responsible for the content of that policy.
[31]
I believe that these basic propositions, obvious as they will be to most, adequately dispose of much of the argument by counsel for the applicant with respect to the general validity of the system.
[32]
Counsel also argued specifically that the public policy guidelines are invalid because they are inconsistent with the objects of the Immigration Act and are unreasonable. Counsel has fallen far short of convincing me that any discernable object of the public policy guidelines is inconsistent with any and all of the purposes of the Act and its amendments. A specific complaint was reiterated concerning the Illegal De Facto Residents Policy on the ground that it arbitrarily favours those who have concealed themselves for a very long time without coming to the attention of immigration authorities, as compared to those who have come forward and filed refugee claims. As I understand it, the effect of the policy is to put the long-term de facto illegal resident in a position where he can apply from within Canada without screening but subject to meeting the requirements of s. 19 with respect to inadmissible classes. This is a position which claimants in the refugee backlog who have come forward can achieve only if they are given favourable treatment on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. I would need far more evidence to be convinced that the distinction is arbitrary and unreasonable and thus an improper exercise of discretionary power. There was some evidence that the sheer number of persons to be processed has led to the use of such distinctions and, given the magnitude of the problem which Canada faces in this respect I am not prepared to say that this is unreasonable. It must be kept in mind at all times that what is in issue here is the conferring of an extra privilege to which no one is given a right under the Act. Further, what is at issue in the present case is the initial review for exercise of the discretion on humanitarian and compassionate grounds in respect of refugee claimants in the Refugee Backlog Clearance Programme. Where such a claimant is unsuccessful at this initial review, he then proceeds to an inquiry in respect of his refugee claim. Further, if he is unsuccessful in his refugee claim, there is a further review of all circumstances related to his case including those of a humanitarian and compassionate nature, prior to any deportation or removal. The court would need far more evidence than that available in the present case to satisfy itself that it should strike down a particular category of public policy as being arbitrary and unreasonable.
Disposition
[33]
The application of Gerardo Gaston Vidal will therefore be dismissed with costs. The application of Outar Dadwah will be granted, with certiorari to quash the decision of Luz Marina Nunez dated August 17, 1990, determining that the applicant had insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to qualify for submitting within Canada an application for permanent residence, and with mandamus compelling the respondent to provide the applicant Outar Dadwah with a full and fair interview of his humanitarian and compassionate claim in accordance with the law.
Vidal's application dismissed;
Dadwah's application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1. R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2.
2. [1990] 1 F.C. 722; 34 F.T.R. 26, as referred to at 726 F.C.
3. This procedure has been approved by the Federal Court of Appeal in Jiminez-Perez and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 170 F.C., confirmed without reference to this point in [1984] 2 S.C.R. 565; 56 N.R. 215.
4. See paragraph 5 of the affidavit of Brian Dougall in the respondent's motion record in each of these cases.
5. Supra, note 2.
6. See e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 8 N.R. 47.
9. SI/79-111.
[End of document]