 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Monica Del Pilar Platin Vargas, Luis Alejandro Platin Riano, Maria Del Pilar Vargas De Platin, Juan Carlos Rodriguez Cumaco, Paula Andrea Rodriguez Platin (by her litigation guardian Juan Carlos Rodriguez Cumaco), and Maria Alejandra Rodriguez Platin (by her litigation guardian  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 484)
Indexed As:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Strickland, J.
May 22, 2014.
Counsel:
Sarah L. Boyd, for the applicants;
Nimanthika Kaneira, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Jackman, Nazami and Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Strickland, J.
: The Principal Applicant, Monica del Pilar Platin Vargas, her husband Juan Carlos Rodriguez Cuamaco, their twin daughters Paula Andrea Rodriguez Platin and Maria Alejandra Rodriguez Platin, and the Principal Applicant's parents, Maria del Pilar Vargas de Platin and Luis Alejandra Platin Riano, seek judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (RPD) dated October 17, 2012 which concluded that the Applicants were not Convention refugees or persons in need of protection pursuant to sections 96 and 97, respectively, of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (IRPA).
Background
[2]
The Applicants are from Columbia and claim that they fear persecution by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). The Principal Applicant claims that she and her mother were community leaders and activists in Bogota. Her parents later moved to Boyaca but were forced to abandon their farm there because of threats by the FARC. In 2002, she and her mother supported Alvaro Uribe in the presidential elections and, as a result, received threatening phone calls. In 2005, there was an attempted abduction of her mother as she left a political meeting. In August 2005, the twins were born. In 2006, a threat in the form of a condolence note concerning the Principal Applicant's mother was received. In May 2006, the Principal Applicant's father fled to the United States and was joined by her mother in July 2006. There, they made an unsuccessful claim for asylum.
[3]
In August 2007, the Principal Applicant again became politically active. She claims that, as a result, she received threatening phone calls from the FARC and that on June 18, 2009 she received a pamphlet at her apartment threatening her and her entire family. In August 2009, she received a call on her cell phone from an individual threatening that she would be the next target. Shortly after this, while en route to pick up her daughters from school, she was followed by a car that passed her and then blocked her way. She avoided the car but heard shots being fired as she escaped. She and her husband then decided to leave Columbia. She and the children left on August 12, 2009 for the United States. Her husband left in April 2010. They arrived in Canada on April 25, 2010 and made a claim for refugee protection the following day. Her parents arrived in Canada on June 8, 2010 and also made a claim for protection on the following day.
[4]
The RPD denied their claims. It found that the Principal Applicant was not credible and that the Applicants had failed to rebut the presumption of state protection.
Decision under review
[5]
With respect to credibility, the RPD noted that the Principal Applicant testified that a bullet fired during the August 2009 encounter caused a hole in her car. However, she did not mention this in her Personal Information Form (PIF), nor did she provide a photograph of the hole or the repair bill. She did not offer any explanation for the omission from the PIF. The Principal Applicant stated that her husband had attended to the repairs and made a police report. However, the report was completed eight months later, on April 9, 2010. The RPD acknowledged the letter of Luz Castellanos, the academic director at the children's school, stating that the Principal Applicant had arrived at school in a distressed state and reported that she had been shot at. However, the RPD found that this was hearsay. The RPD concluded on a balance of probabilities that the incident did not occur. Even if there was an incident, there was no persuasive evidence that the FARC was involved. Further, the Principal Applicant's husband only reported it to the police the day before he left Columbia. The RPD did not accept his explanation that he made the report at that time so that there would be a record, but rather found that the report was made to support a claim for refugee protection and, for that reason, gave it no weight. The Principal Applicant's PIF narrative was the sole narrative adduced for the family.
[6]
As to the attempted abduction, the Principal Applicant's mother testified that they did not immediately report it to the police because of their fears of the FARC and its threats to kill them. She also did not report a further telephone call from the FARC in June 2006. When the RPD pointed out that the Principal Applicant had made no reference to the attempted abduction in her PIF, her mother explained that the Principal Applicant had not been told of the incident because her health at the time was delicate. She was only informed a year and a half later and after she had written her PIF. The RPD noted that the Principal Applicant had not amended her PIF even when she was apprised of the attempted abduction. Further, that she had provided a sworn affidavit in her parents' US claim for asylum referring to continuous threats and kidnapping attempts since December 2005. Despite the inconsistencies and omissions, the RPD found that the applications of the Principal Applicant's parents did mention the attempted abduction and it therefore accepted that there had been an incident in December 2005.
[7]
While the Principal Applicant's father testified that they were forced to leave their farm which was taken over by the FARC, the RPD found that the parents' US asylum claim did not mention this. The father testified that he reported the thefts of cattle and the death threats to the police in 1998 or 1999, but he did not have copies of the police reports because they had been left at the farm. In 1998, he was provided with a small piece of paper confirming his attendance at the police station. The father stated that the police went to his farm to view damage to the fence, but that this was the extent of their investigation.
[8]
As to state protection, the RPD found that on a balance of probabilities, the Applicants had not rebutted the presumption of state protection. It noted that the Applicants did not report the alleged incident of December 2005. Further, there was no persuasive evidence that the police did not respond appropriately when they were advised of threats against the Principal Applicant's mother. The RPD found that the police did investigate the problems at the farm. No police report was made on behalf of the Principal Applicant and her family concerning the alleged shooting until after she had left the country. The RPD reviewed the documentary evidence and found that the preponderance of the objective evidence regarding current country conditions suggested that, although not perfect, there was adequate state protection in Columbia for victims of crime.
Standard of Review
[9]
The standard of review with respect to credibility findings, which are essentially pure findings of fact, is reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). That standard also applies to determinations of state protection (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Reasonableness is concerned with the justification, transparency and intelligibility of the decision-making process, but also with whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes defensible in respect of the facts and law (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 47).
[10]
When reviewing a credibility finding, it must be kept in mind that an administrative tribunal is in an advantageous position for assessing the credibility of witnesses, accordingly, the Court must show deference when reviewing findings of this kind (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) at paras 7 to 9). The Court will only intervene in a credibility finding if the decision-maker based its decision on "an erroneous finding of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner or if it made its decision without regard to the material before it" ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above).
Analysis
[11]
In my view, the RPD's adverse credibility finding was reasonable. The RPD clearly stated its reasons for finding that the Applicants lacked credibility and for doubting the veracity of their story. Upon reading the decision as a whole, the RPD's reasons indicate that it made a general negative credibility finding which was based on its disbelief that the shooting incident occurred and on inconsistencies and omissions in the evidence.
[12]
In this regard, the RPD noted that although the Principal Applicant's mother claimed that her daughter was not made aware of the kidnapping attempt in 2005 until after she had submitted the PIF, she had in fact, provided a sworn affidavit in her parents' US claim for asylum in which she referred to "continuous threats and kidnapping attempts since December of year 2005". The RPD also noted that the 2005 abduction attempt was not reported to the police until April 2006 and that the threats from the FARC causing the farm to be abandoned, was not mentioned in the Principal Applicant's parents' US asylum claim or in the Applicants' Canadian claims. Rather, it arose for the first time during the hearing. Finally, the RPD noted that although the Principal Applicant's husband stated that he and his wife had received threatening phone calls, he also claimed that he had not been directly targeted.
[13]
The Principal Applicant testified that she found a bullet hole in her car after the alleged August 2009 incident, however, she had not included that information in her PIF nor did she amend her PIF before the hearing. The RPD is entitled to compare her PIF to her testimony and to make credibility findings based on inconsistencies and omissions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). When asked why she did not include the incident in her PIF, she stated that she did not remember why and offered no explanation for this omission. The RPD also reasonably considered the fact that the incident was only reported to the police eight months after it occurred, and right before the Principal Applicant's husband left Colombia to join his family.
[14]
The Applicants also allege that the RPD rejected, without reason, the Principal Applicant's explanation of why the bullet hole was not documented or referred to in the PIF as well as the corroborative evidence comprised of the letter from the academic director of her daughters' school. When questioned about why she did not take any pictures of the damage, the Principal Applicant claimed that it was due to a fear of the FARC. She also stated that she did not possess a copy of the bill because her husband had received it. The RPD asked why she and her husband did not provide a copy of the bill in the evidence they provided, in response she explained that it was because she departed the country two days after the incident. Given that the Principal Applicant's husband testified that he had made the police report to leave a record that the family was leaving because they were threatened by the FARC, it is reasonable to infer that the husband would also have documented the bullet hole in their vehicle for the same reason and would have retained the repair bill. This is particularly so as he did not leave Columbia until eight months after his wife and children and was aware that they would be seeking refugee protection in Canada.
[15]
The RPD did not, and was not obliged to accept the Principal Applicant's explanation (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In this case it is apparent that the rejection was founded on credibility as the explanation given was not plausible in the circumstances.
[16]
The RPD acknowledged the letter from the academic director, considered it in its reasons, but discounted it as being hearsay. Thus, while it was admitted as evidence, it was afforded little weight. It is open for the Board to assign greater or lesser weight to evidence based on its source and any existing corroboration (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). While I question the RPD's discounting of this evidence solely on the basis of it being hearsay, upon reading the decision as a whole, it is apparent that the RPD did not accept that the incident occurred, given the inconsistencies and omissions in the evidence. It was therefore entitled to weigh the letter accordingly. The RPD had also requested corroborative evidence, such as the documenting of the bullet hole and repair to the car, which would have been reasonably available to the Applicants but which was not provided nor was its absence reasonably explained. Given this, in my view, the RPD considered all the submissions, reasonably rejected the explanation as to the lack of often corroborating evidence and weighed the evidence accordingly.
[17]
As to the Applicants' contention that the RPD could not reject the claim solely based on a lack of corroborative evidence, this is true if a claimant's credibility is not in question (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) at para 45). However, here, the Board did not base its credibility finding solely on the basis of a lack of supporting documentation, but also on omissions and inconsistencies in the evidence. When a Board has concerns about credibility, these "[...] impact the assessment of documentary evidence or the absence thereof. The need for corroboration is even more important where credibility is in issue" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
Rosales
]).
[18]
In sum, the Board was best placed to evaluate credibility and its decision fell within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes defensible in respect of the facts and the law (
Rosales
, above, at para 20).
[19]
As to state protection, the Applicants submit that the RPD cannot selectively rely on the documentary evidence without making a reasoned analysis for its preference for some of the evidence. Here, the RPD relied on evidence that refers to recent changes to the legislation or to security services in Columbia, but this evidence also clearly demonstrates that the dangers are far from being resolved. The Applicants submit that it does not appear that the RPD was cognizant of the situation in Columbia. Claimants need only seek state protection where it might reasonably be forthcoming and a claim cannot be defeated solely on a failure to approach state authorities in the past. The Applicants further submit that state protection findings cannot be dispositive where there is an error in credibility findings. Moreover, the RPD must properly analyze the evidence and provide reasons for its conclusions which it has not done in this case.
[20]
The Respondent submits, in essence, that based on the facts of this case the Applicants did not satisfy their burden of providing clear and convincing evidence that state protection was ineffective and inadequate. It is insufficient to rely solely on documentary evidence indicating flaws in the system if the Applicants have failed to avail themselves of available state protection. Here, the Applicants seek to rely on documentary evidence in the absence of their own failure to seek state protection in a consistent and timely manner.
[21]
In order to rebut the presumption of state protection, the claimant "must adduce relevant, reliable and convincing evidence which satisfies the trier of fact on a balance of probabilities that state protection is inadequate" (
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). State protection need not be perfect, but it must be adequate, and "only in situations in which state protection 'might reasonably have been forthcoming' will the claimant's failure to approach the state for protection defeat his claim" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Adequate state protection involves more than making "serious efforts" to address problems and protect citizens (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Instead, the RPD's focus must be on what is actually happening in a country, that is, evidence of actual or operational level protection, and not on efforts that a state is endeavouring to put in place (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
While the RPD need not refer to every piece of evidence presented, the more significant a piece of evidence is, the more likely it is that a failure to make reference to it will result in a finding that the Decision was unreasonable, especially when it appears to be a marked contradiction to a finding of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[23]
In my view, based on the record before it, including the Principal Applicant's PIF and the testimony of the other Applicants, the RPD reasonably found that the Applicants failed to rebut the presumption of state protection. The RPD made a number of findings which are reasonable based on the record including that: the Applicants did not report the alleged incident of December 2005 to the police (until 2006); there was no persuasive evidence that the police did not respond properly when advised of the threats against the Principal Applicant's mother; the police did investigate the incidents on the farm; and, that the Applicants did not file a police report until the Principal Applicant fled the country and her husband left the day after making the report.
[24]
On the latter point, it was open for the RPD to find that the filing of a denunciation and subsequent departure from Columbia while that process was continuing did not constitute clear and convincing proof of Columbia's inability to protect the Principal Applicant. A similar finding was made in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[25]
The Applicants allege that the RPD ignored country conditions evidence which contradicted its findings. However, the RPD is not required to mention every piece of evidence relied upon in its decision and, more specifically, as the Court stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) (
sub nom  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  every piece of evidence relied upon in its decision, particularly when it is clear from the reasons that the tribunal has taken into account all the relevant evidence acknowledging that the Mexican state protection apparatus is imperfect and highlighting the shortcomings and improvements that the government has made.
[26]
Here, the RPD recognized human rights abuses, corruption and impunity in Colombia. It also recognized that Colombia is experiencing challenges in addressing corruption and impunity in its security forces. It acknowledged that there are some inconsistencies in the evidence, but found that the preponderance of the objective evidence suggests that, although not perfect, there is adequate state protection in Colombia for victims of crime. The RPD reviewed the measures being taken by Colombia and its progress to combat the FARC and it did not ignore contradictory evidence.
[27]
In any event, the documentary evidence does not assist the Applicants given that the RPD found that they failed to take steps to avail themselves of state protection in Columbia ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 16) and because there was a lack of personal evidence to rebut the presumption of state protection. Further, the state protection finding is not determinative given the RPD's credibility finding (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[28]
For these reasons the application for judicial review must be denied.
JUDGMENT
[29]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
1. The application for judicial review is denied;
2. No question of general importance for certification was proposed nor does one arise.
.........................
Monica Del Pilar Platin Vargas, Luis Alejandro Platin Riano, Maria Del Pilar Vargas De Platin, Juan Carlos Rodriguez Cumaco, Paula Andrea Rodriguez Platin (représentée par son tuteur à l'instance, Juan Carlos Rodriguez Cumaco) et Maria Alejandra Rodriguez Platin (représentée par son tuteur à l'instance,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demanderesse principale, Monica del Pilar Platin Vargas, son époux, Juan Carlos Rodriguez Cuamaco, leurs filles jumelles, Paula Andrea Rodriguez Platin et Maria Alejandra Rodriguez Platin, et les parents de la demanderesse principale, Maria del Pilar Vargas de Platin et Luis Alejandra Platin Riano, sollicitent le contrôle judiciaire de la décision en date du 17 octobre 2012 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR) a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention ni celle de personnes à protéger au sens des articles 96 et 97, respectivement, de la Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés, LC 2001, c 27 (la LIPR).
Les faits
[2]
Les demandeurs sont originaires de la Colombie. Ils affirment craindre d'être persécutés par les Forces armées révolutionnaires de Colombie (les FARC). Selon la demanderesse principale, sa mère et elle étaient chefs de communauté et militantes à Bogotá. Ses parents ont déménagé plus tard à Boyaca, mais ils ont été forcés de quitter leur ferme en raison des menaces proférées par les FARC. En 2002, sa mère et elle ont appuyé Alvaro Uribe au cours des élections présidentielles et, par conséquent, ont reçu des appels de menaces. En 2005, sa mère a fait l'objet d'une tentative d'enlèvement lorsqu'elle quittait une réunion politique. En août 2005 sont nées les jumelles. En 2006, des menaces ont été reçues sous la forme d'une note de condoléances pour la mère de la demanderesse principale. En mai 2006, le père de la demanderesse principale s'est enfui aux États-Unis où il a été rejoint par la mère de la demanderesse principale en juillet de la même année. Ils ont présenté une demande d'asile qui a été rejetée.
[3]
En août 2007, la demanderesse principale a repris ses activités politiques. Elle soutient avoir reçu en conséquence des appels de menaces de la part des FARC et ajoute que, le 18 juin 2009, elle a reçu à son appartement un dépliant qui contenait des menaces à son égard et à l'égard de toute sa famille. En août 2009, elle a reçu un appel sur son téléphone cellulaire; la personne qui l'appelait lui a dit qu'elle serait la prochaine à être prise pour cible. Peu de temps après, alors qu'elle était en route pour aller chercher ses filles à l'école maternelle, la demanderesse s'est rendu compte qu'elle était suivie par un véhicule qui l'a dépassée et lui a bloqué la route. Elle a évité la voiture, mais elle a entendu des coups de feu tirés en sa direction lorsqu'elle s'est enfuie. Elle et son époux ont décidé de quitter la Colombie. Elle est partie aux États-Unis avec ses enfants le 12 août 2009. Son époux a quitté le pays en avril 2010. Ils sont arrivés au Canada le 25 avril 2010 et ont demandé l'asile le jour suivant. Ses parents sont arrivés au Canada le 8 juin 2010 et ont eux aussi demandé l'asile le jour suivant.
[4]
La SPR a rejeté leurs demandes. Essentiellement, le tribunal a conclu que la demanderesse principale n'était pas crédible et qu'elle n'avait pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État.
La décision contestée
[5]
En ce qui concerne la crédibilité, la SPR a souligné que, selon la demanderesse principale, une balle tirée lors de l'incident survenu en août 2009 a fait un trou dans sa voiture. Or, la demanderesse n'a pas mentionné cet incident dans son formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) ni n'a fourni de photo du trou en question ou de facture de la réparation. Elle n'a aucunement expliqué l'omission dans le FRP. La demanderesse principale a déclaré que son époux avait fait réparer la voiture et avait signalé l'incident à la police. Toutefois, il a porté plainte huit mois plus tard, soit le 9 avril 2010. La SPR a pris acte de la lettre de Luz Castellanos, le directeur des études à l'école des enfants, indiquant que la demanderesse principale était arrivée à l'école dans un état de détresse et avait dit que quelqu'un lui avait tiré dessus. La SPR a toutefois estimé que les déclarations du directeur constituaient du ouï-dire. La SPR a conclu, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que l'incident n'était jamais survenu. Même si l'accident était survenu, il n'existait aucun élément de preuve convaincant de la participation des FARC. De plus, l'époux de la demanderesse principale n'a signalé l'incident à police que le jour précédant son départ de la Colombie. La SPR n'a pas retenu l'explication que celui-ci a donnée, à savoir qu'il avait porté plainte ce jour-là pour conserver une trace de l'incident, mais a plutôt conclu que la plainte visait à appuyer une demande d'asile. Pour cette raison, la SPR n'a accordé aucun poids à cet élément. L'exposé circonstancié de la demanderesse principale contenu dans son FRP était le seul pour toute la famille.
[6]
En ce qui concerne la tentative d'enlèvement, la mère de la demanderesse principale a déclaré qu'ils ne l'ont pas immédiatement signalée à la police parce qu'ils craignaient les FARC qui les avaient menacés de mort. Elle n'a pas non plus signalé un autre appel de la part des FARC reçu en juin 2006. Lorsque la SPR a relevé que la demanderesse principale n'avait fait aucune mention de la tentative d'enlèvement dans son FRP, sa mère a expliqué que personne ne lui avait dit, car, à ce moment-là, sa santé était fragile. L'incident lui a été révélé un an et demi après qu'elle eut rédigé son FRP. La SPR a noté que la demanderesse principale n'avait apporté aucune modification à son FRP, même lorsqu'elle a appris la tentative d'enlèvement. La SPR a également souligné que la demanderesse principale a fourni une déclaration sous serment dans les demandes d'asile présentées aux États-Unis par ses parents, faisant référence aux menaces et aux tentatives d'enlèvement constantes depuis décembre 2005. Malgré les contradictions et les omissions, la SPR a conclu que la tentative d'enlèvement figure dans les demandes d'asile présentées par les parents de la demanderesse principale et a donc accepté qu'un incident soit survenu en décembre 2005.
[7]
Bien que le père de la demanderesse principale ait déclaré qu'ils ont été forcés de quitter leur ferme dont se sont emparés les FARC, la SPR a conclu que les demandes d'asile présentées aux États-Unis ne faisaient pas référence à cette histoire. Le père a déclaré avoir signalé le vol du bétail et les menaces de mort à la police en 1998 ou en 1999, mais qu'il n'avait pas de copies des rapports de la police parce qu'ils avaient été laissés à la ferme. En 1998, il a reçu un petit bout de papier confirmant sa présence au poste de police. Le père a affirmé que des policiers se sont rendus à la ferme pour constater les dommages causés à la clôture et que leur enquête s'est arrêtée là.
[8]
Quant à la protection de l'État, la SPR a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, les demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État. La SPR a noté que les demandeurs n'ont pas signalé l'incident qui serait survenu en décembre 2005. De plus, il n'y a aucun élément de preuve démontrant que la police n'a pas réagi de façon appropriée lorsqu'elle a été mise au courant des menaces proférées contre la mère de la demanderesse principale. La SPR a conclu que les policiers avaient fait enquête sur les problèmes survenus à la ferme. Aucune plainte n'a été faite de la part de la demanderesse ou de sa famille au sujet de la présumée fusillade avant qu'elle ne quitte le pays. La SPR a examiné la preuve documentaire et a conclu que la prépondérance de la preuve objective concernant les conditions actuelles dans le pays porte à croire que l'État offre une protection adéquate, bien qu'imparfaite, aux victimes d'actes criminels en Colombie.
La norme de contrôle applicable
[9]
La norme de contrôle applicable aux conclusions sur la crédibilité, qui sont essentiellement de pures conclusions de fait, est celle de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 26;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 32;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aux par. 17 et 18;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). Cette norme s'applique également aux conclusions relatives à la protection de l'État (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 7). Le caractère raisonnable d'une décision tient à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au par. 47).
[10]
Lorqu'il s'agit d'examiner une conclusion sur la crédibilité, il faut garder à l'esprit qu'un tribunal administratif est dans une position avantageuse pour évaluer la crédibilité des témoins, ce qui implique donc que la Cour doit faire preuve de déférence lorsqu'elle révise ce genre de conclusions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1re inst.), aux par. 7 à 9). La Cour n'interviendra à l'égard d'une conclusion sur la crédibilité que si le décideur a rendu une décision fondée sur « une conclusion de fait erronée, tirée de façon abusive ou arbitraire ou sans tenir compte des éléments dont il dispose » ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée).
Analyse
[11]
À mon avis, la conclusion défavorable tirée par la SPR sur la crédibilité était raisonnable. La SPR a clairement expliqué pourquoi elle avait conclu que les demandeurs n'étaient pas crédibles et pourquoi elle doutait de la véracité de leur récit. Il ressort de la décision dans son ensemble que la SPR a formulé une conclusion générale défavorable sur la crédibilité parce qu'elle doutait que la fusillade soit survenue et en raison des contradictions et des omissions relevées dans la preuve.
[12]
À cet égard, la SPR a noté que, bien que la mère de la demanderesse principale ait affirmé que sa fille n'avait été mise au courant de la tentative d'enlèvement survenue en 2005 qu'après avoir soumis le FRP, elle avait en fait fourni une déclaration sous serment dans la demande d'asile présentée par ses parents aux États-Unis faisant référence aux [traduction] « menaces et [aux] tentatives d'enlèvement constantes depuis décembre 2005 ». La SPR a également noté que la tentative d'enlèvement survenue en 2005 n'avait été signalée à la police qu'en avril 2006 et que les menaces de la part des FARC qui ont amené les demandeurs à quitter la ferme n'ont pas été mentionnées dans la demande d'asile présentée par les parents de la demanderesse principale aux États-Unis ni dans les demandes d'asile présentées par les demandeurs au Canada. Cette question a été plutôt soulevée au cours de l'audience. Enfin, la SPR a souligné que, même si l'époux de la demanderesse principale avait affirmé que son épouse et lui avaient reçu des appels de menaces, il a également déclaré qu'il n'était pas directement visé.
[13]
La demanderesse principale a déclaré avoir trouvé un trou de balle dans sa voiture après l'incident qui serait survenu en août 2009. Or, elle n'a pas mentionné cet incident dans son FRP ni n'a modifié son FRP avant l'audience. Il est loisible à la SPR de comparer le FRP de la demanderesse à son témoignage et de fonder ses conclusions concernant la crédibilité sur des contradictions et des omissions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aux par. 14 et 15;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 29). Quand on lui a demandé pourquoi elle n'avait pas fait mention de cet incident dans son FRP, elle a dit qu'elle ne se souvenait pas et n'a offert aucune explication pour cette omission. La SPR a aussi raisonnablement tenu compte du fait que l'incident en question avait été signalé à la police avec huit mois de retard, tout juste avant que l'époux de la demanderesse principale quitte la Colombie pour rejoindre sa famille.
[14]
Les demandeurs font également valoir que la SPR a écarté, sans motif, l'explication de la demanderesse principale quant à la raison pour laquelle l'incident lié au trou de balle n'avait pas été documenté ni mentionné dans le FRP, ainsi que les éléments de preuve corroborants correspondant à la lettre du directeur des études de l'école de ses filles. Interrogée quant à la raison pour laquelle elle n'avait pas pris des photos des dommages causés, la demanderesse principale a répondu qu'elle craignait les FARC. Elle a ajouté qu'elle n'avait pas de copie de la facture parce que c'était son époux qui l'avait reçue. La SPR a demandé pourquoi son époux et elle n'avaient pas fourni une copie de la facture parmi les éléments de preuve présentés. La demanderesse principale a répondu que c'était parce qu'elle avait quitté le pays deux jours après l'incident. Comme l'époux de la demanderesse principale a témoigné qu'il avait signalé l'incident à la police pour conserver une trace du départ de la famille qui était attribuable aux menaces des FARC, il est raisonnable d'inférer que celui-ci aurait documenté l'incident lié au trou de balle dans leur voiture, pour la même raison, et qu'il aurait gardé la facture de la réparation. Cela est d'autant plus vrai, vu qu'il n'a quitté la Columbie que huit mois après le départ de son épouse et de ses enfants et qu'il savait qu'ils demanderaient l'asile au Canada.
[15]
La SPR n'a pas accepté l'explication de la demanderesse et n'était pas tenue de le faire (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 19). En l'espèce, il est évident que le rejet reposait sur la crédibilité, vu que l'explication donnée était invraisemblable dans les circonstances.
[16]
La SPR a retenu la lettre du directeur des études et l'a prise en considération dans ses motifs, mais a estimé qu'elle constituait du ouï-dire. Ainsi, même si la SPR a admis cette lettre en preuve, elle lui a accordé peu de poids. Il est loisible à la Commission d'attribuer un poids accru ou réduit à la preuve en fonction de sa source et de l'existence de corroboration (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 19). Bien que je m'interroge quant à l'importance réduite que la SPR a accordée à cet élément de preuve du seul fait qu'elle constituait du ouï-dire, compte tenu de la décision dans son ensemble, il est manifeste que la SPR n'était pas convaincue que l'incident en question s'était produit, vu les contradictions et les omissions dans la preuve. La SPR était donc en droit d'évaluer la lettre en conséquence. La SPR avait également demandé des éléments de preuve corroborants, notamment en ce qui concerne le trou de balle et la réparation de la voiture, documents que les demandeurs auraient raisonnablement pu se procurer, mais qu'ils n'avaient pas fournis; les demandeurs n'avaient pas non plus justifié raisonnablement l'absence de ces documents. Par conséquent, j'estime que la SPR a tenu compte de toutes les observations, qu'elle a rejeté avec raison l'explication quant à l'absence d'éléments de preuve souvent corroborants et qu'elle a évalué la preuve en conséquence.
[17]
En ce qui concerne la prétention des demandeurs selon laquelle la SPR ne pouvait pas rejeter leur demande d'asile en se fondant uniquement sur l'absence d'une preuve corroborante, il en va de même si la crédibilité n'est pas mise en question (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aux par. 19 à 22;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1re inst.), au par. 45). Or, en l'espèce, la Commission n'a pas fondé sa conclusion quant à la crédibilité uniquement sur l'absence de documents corroborants, mais aussi sur les omissions et les contradictions relevées dans la preuve. Les doutes concernant la crédibilité « influent sur l'appréciation de la preuve documentaire ou de l'absence de celle-ci. La nécessité que la preuve soit corroborée est encore plus importante lorsque la crédibilité est en cause » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 19 [
Rosales
]).
[18]
En somme, la Commission était la mieux placée pour évaluer la crédibilité et sa décision appartenait aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit (
Rosales
, précitée, au par. 20).
[19]
En ce qui concerne la protection de l'État, les demandeurs affirment que la SPR ne peut se fonder sur certains éléments de preuve documentaire sans procéder à une analyse raisonnée pour expliquer sa préférence à cet égard. En l'espèce, la SPR s'est appuyée sur des éléments de preuve faisant état des modifications récentes apportées à la législation et aux services de sécurité en Colombie, mais qui démontrent manifestement que les risques sont loin d'être écartés. Selon les demandeurs, rien n'indique que la SPR était au fait de la situation en Colombie. Les demandeurs d'asile n'ont pas à s'adresser à l'État pour obtenir sa protection dans les cas où il est raisonnable qu'ils l'obtiennent; une demande d'asile ne saurait être rejetée du seul fait que les demandeurs ne se sont pas adressés aux autorités de l'État dans le passé. Les demandeurs ajoutent que les conclusions relatives à la protection de l'État ne sauraient être déterminantes lorsque les conclusions sur la crédibilité sont entachées d'erreur. De plus, la SPR doit analyser correctement la preuve et fournir des motifs pour justifier ses conclusions, ce qui n'a pas été fait en l'espèce.
[20]
Le défendeur fait essentiellement valoir que, d'après les faits de l'espèce, les demandeurs ne se sont pas acquittés de leur obligation de démontrer par une preuve claire et convaincante que la protection de l'État était inefficace et inadéquate. Il ne suffit pas de se fonder uniquement sur la preuve documentaire relevant des failles dans le système si les demandeurs ne se sont pas prévalus de la protection offerte par l'État. En l'espèce, les demandeurs tentent d'invoquer la preuve documentaire en l'absence de leur propre omission de solliciter la protection de l'État de manière uniforme et diligente.
[21]
Pour réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État, le demandeur « doit produire une preuve pertinente, digne de foi et convaincante qui démontre au juge des faits, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection accordée par l'État en question est insuffisante » (
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 30). La protection offerte par l'État n'a pas à être parfaite, mais elle doit être suffisante; « l'omission du demandeur de s'adresser à l'État pour obtenir sa protection fera échouer sa revendication seulement dans le cas où la protection de l'État [traduction] "aurait pu raisonnablement être assurée" » (
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, au par. 49, 103 DLR (4th) 1;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aux par. 15, 18). Une protection suffisante offerte par l'État nécessite davantage que de « sérieux efforts » pour régler des problèmes et protéger ses citoyens (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 16). La SPR doit plutôt tenir compte de la situation réelle au pays, soit des efforts ayant, dans les faits, véritablement engendré une protection adéquate de l'État, et non de ce que l'État a entrepris de mettre en place (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aux par. 5 et 6;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 12).
[22]
La SPR n'a pas besoin de référer à chacun des éléments de preuve présentés; toutefois, la décision sera probablement considérée comme étant déraisonnable si la SPR omet de référer à un élément de preuve important (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1re inst.);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 16).
[23]
À mon avis, d'après le dossier dont elle était saisie, y compris le FRP de la demanderesse principale et le témoignage des autres demandeurs, la SPR a conclu de manière raisonnable que les demandeurs n'ont pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État. La SPR a formulé plusieurs conclusions qui sont raisonnables, compte tenu du dossier, notamment que les demandeurs n'ont signalé l'incident qui serait survenu en décembre 2005 à la police qu'en 2006, qu'il n'y avait aucun élément de preuve démontrant que les autorités n'avaient pas réagi de façon appropriée lorsqu'elles avaient été mises au courant des menaces proférées contre la mère de la demanderesse principale, que les policiers ont enquêté sur les incidents survenus à la ferme et que les demandeurs n'ont déposé aucune plainte avant que la demanderesse principale ne quitte le pays, et que son mari est parti le lendemain du signalement.
[24]
En ce qui a trait au dernier point, il était raisonnable pour la SPR de conclure que la présentation d'une dénonciation et le départ subséquent de la Colombie, alors que la procédure était en cours, ne constituaient pas une preuve claire et convaincante de l'incapacité de la Colombie de protéger la demanderesse principale. Une conclusion semblable a été formulée dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 24, et dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 39.
[25]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la SPR a fait abstraction des documents faisant état de la situation au pays qui contredisaient ses conclusions. Or, la SPR n'est pas tenue de mentionner chaque élément de preuve sur lequel elle se fonde dans sa décision, et, plus précisément, comme l'a déclaré la Cour dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 17 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) (
sub nom.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  mentionner chaque élément de preuve sur lequel il se fonde dans sa décision, surtout lorsqu'il appert clairement des motifs qu'il a tenu compte de l'ensemble de la preuve pertinente dans laquelle la faiblesse du régime de protection de l'État au Mexique est reconnue et dans laquelle les failles sont relevées, de même que les améliorations que le gouvernement a apportées.
[26]
En l'espèce, la SPR a reconnu l'existence en Colombie des violations des droits de la personne, de la corruption et de l'impunité. La SPR a également reconnu que la Colombie a de la difficulté à lutter contre la criminalité et la corruption qui existent au sein de ses forces de sécurité. La SPR a reconnu qu'il y avait quelques incohérences dans la preuve, mais a conclu que la prépondérance de la preuve objective porte à croire que l'État offre une protection adéquate, bien qu'imparfaite, aux victimes d'actes criminels en Colombie. La SPR a examiné les mesures prises par la Colombie et ses progrès dans la lutte contre les FARC et n'a pas fait abstraction des éléments de preuve contradictoires.
[27]
Quoi qu'il en soit, la preuve documentaire n'est d'aucun secours aux demandeurs, étant donné que la SPR a conclu que ceux-ci n'ont pris aucune mesure pour se prévaloir de la protection de l'État en Colombie ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au par. 16), et vu l'absence d'éléments de preuve personnels permettant de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État. De plus, la conclusion relative à la protection de l'État n'est pas déterminante, compte tenu de la conclusion de la SPR quant à la crédibilité (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 62;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 5).
[28]
Pour ces motifs, la demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée.
JUGEMENT
[29]
LA COUR STATUE comme suit
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée;
2. Les parties n'ont proposé aucune question d'importance générale à certifier et aucune question ne se pose en l'espèce.
[End of document]