 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Figgie International Inc. carrying on business as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Novikow d.b.a. Tri Star Homecare, Krishan Kumar Puri and Terry Thomas d.b.a Northern Compact (defendants) and Citywide Machine Wholesale Inc. (plaintiff by counterclaim) and Figgie International Inc. carrying on business as Interstate Engineering and 932552 Ontario Limited carrying on business as Tristar Distribution Centre (defendants by counterclaim) 
 
 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
 June 14, 1993. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The plaintiff commenced similar actions against the defendants in the Federal Court and in the Ontario Supreme Court, General Division. Two of the defendants applied to stay the Federal Court action. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Actions - Topic 2606 
 
 Duplicitous or vexatious actions - Stay of proceedings - [See  
 Practice - Topic 5277 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Practice - Topic 5277 
 
 Trials - General - Stay of proceedings - When available - The plaintiffs sued the defendants in both the Federal Court and the Ontario Supreme Court, General Division - The proceedings were similar, but certain aspects of the Federal Court action did not constitute part of the Ontario action - Two of the defendants applied to stay the Federal Court action - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, dismissed the application - A stay sought by only some of the defendants would not stop the Federal Court proceed­ings - The plaintiff could be prejudiced by the stay, which would delay the obtention of relief that might be necessary outside of Ontario - The two actions overlapped, but were not duplicitous - The plaintiff ad­equately explained the necessity for two separate actions. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Noticed: 
 
 Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, sect. 50(1) [para. 5]. 
 
 Trade-marks Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, generally [para. 4]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Mr. Renaud, for plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim; 
 
 P. Smith, for defendants, Citywide and Kumar Puri and plaintiff by counter­claim; 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Sim, Hughes, Dimock, Toronto, Ontario, for plaintiff and defendants by counter­claim; 
 
 Smart & Biggar, Vancouver, British Co­lumbia, for defendants Citywide and Kumar Puri and plaintiff by counter­claim. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on June 14, 1993, at Vancouver, British Columbia, before Rothstein, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment orally on June 14, 1993. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Rothstein, J. 
  [orally]: This is an application for a stay of proceedings in this court by the defendants, Citywide Machine Wholesale Inc., and Krishan Kumar Puri. Counsel for these defendants indicates that a similar action is proceeding in the Supreme Court of Ontario General Division. The action is similar and the relief being sought is the same or similar. Proceedings were commenced in both this court and in the Ontario Court General Division in approximately June of 1992 and pleadings were ultimately closed at the end of April, 1993. There have been exchanges of affidavits of documents and the matter, at least in this court has proceeded to the discovery stage although discoveries have not yet been held. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The two defendants seeking the stay submit that there is significant overlapping and that because the issues are the same or at least similar or at least that the issues in the Federal Court are already encompassed largely in the Ontario Court action that the Federal Court action should be stayed. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Counsel for these defendants admitted that there were certain aspects of the Federal Court action that did not constitute part of the Ontario action but indicated that there had been certain agreements with regard to those aspects of the Federal Court action that would result in there being no prejudice if the Federal Court action were stayed. I note that in this case the stay is not being sought by all defendants and therefore, presumably, any order that I might grant by way of stay would not be fully effective in stopping the proceedings in the Federal Court. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  I also note that events are well advanced. Counsel for the plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim has indicated that certain relief being sought in the Ontario Court General Division would not be fully effective for his clients' purposes as it would not apply outside of the Province of Ontario. In this respect he refers to injunctive relief that he submits is necessary outside the Province of Ontario. Counsel for the plaintiff also argues that there is different relief being sought and different causes of action being pursued in the two courts. He cites for example, the cause of action of passing off, the common law action, in the Ontario Court General Division as compared to passing off under the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 , in the Federal Court. Counsel for the plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim submits that while proceeding would not be prejudicial to the defendants, the granting of a stay would be prejudicial to the plaintiff and in this respect refers to delay in the type of recovery that might only be obtained from the Federal Court and not from the Ontario Court General Division if these proceedings were to be stayed and the Ontario proceedings were to be continued. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The court's jurisdiction to grant stays arises from s. 50 of the  
 Federal Court Act 
  which provide in subs. 1. 
 
 
 
 "The court may in its discretion stay proceedings in any cause or matter; 
 
 
 
 (a) on the grounds that the claim is being proceeded within another court or jurisdiction; or 
 
 
 
 (b) where for any other reason it is in the interest of justice that the proceedings be stayed." 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In his memorandum of law, counsel for the plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim cited some of the jurisprudence that pertains to the granting of stays which I understood counsel for the two defendants who are applicants for this motion acknowledges is well accepted. First, the court's power to stay should be exercised sparingly and in only the clearest of cases.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  proceedings is never granted as a matter of course. The matter calls for the exercise of judicial discretion in determining whether a stay should be ordered in the particular circumstances of a case. In order to justify a stay of proceedings two conditions must be met, one positive and one negative. 
 
 
 
 A) The moving party must satisfy the court that the continuance of the action will work an injustice because it would be oppressive or vexatious to him or would be an abuse of the process of the court in some other way, and 
 
 
 
 B) The stay must not cause an injustice to the responding party. The onus is on the moving party to establish these conditions, expense and inconvenience to a party are not special circumstances of the granting of a stay. 
 
 
 
 "3. Where there are fundamental jurisdictional reasons for bringing in action in both a Superior Court and the Federal Court of Canada, a stay of the Federal Court proceedings is not appropriate." 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Counsel for the plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim's memorandum contains other references but those are the only ones that I think are pertinent for the purposes of my decision. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  In this case, it seems to me that there would be more confusion and possibly greater expense created by the granting of the stay as requested than by not granting. The stay presumably would be granted only in respect of the two defendants who have made the application before me today but not for the other defendants. There would then presumably continue to be a proceeding carried on in the Federal Court against some defendants and not against others. Neither counsel could advise me of any precedents or cases that provided that stays were granted in respect of only some parties. Stays, as I have been told, will only be granted where they are fully effective or where they apply to all parties. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  This makes the granting of the stay a very awkward type of relief to consider at this juncture of proceedings. I am also concerned that there could be prejudice to the plaintiff in respect of the delay in obtaining relief that may be necessary outside of the Province of Ontario and for which a judgment in the plaintiff's favour in the Province of Ontario would provide no useful remedy. Of course I am making no observations on the merits of the case in saying this, but merely observing that the plaintiff should not be prejudiced by the granting of a stay in this action. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  I do not see that there is any unnecessary duplication as between the two actions. I recognize from the submissions of counsel for the two defendants making the application before me today that there is a degree of overlap but counsel for the plaintiff has, at least to my satisfaction today, explained the need for proceeding in both courts and the need for the overlap such as it may be. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  I do not see that proceeding in the two courts is anything in the nature of vexatious or in any other way inappropriate. For these reasons, I would not grant the motion for the stay as requested today. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  However, in refusing to grant the motion, I will make reference to two observations made to me by counsel for the plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim. He did indicate that the parties in both the Ontario Court General Division and in the Federal Court of Canada were the same, although they may not be styled in the exact same way in the styles of cause in both actions. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  However, all the parties, being the same in both actions, it seemed to me that serious consideration should be given to attempting to utilize future proceedings either in this court or in the Ontario Court General Division in the most efficient way possible. I had suggested to counsel that pretrial examinations might be consolidated so that only one set of pretrial examinations might have to be carried out and used in both courts. I recognize that this may not be something that can be totally complied with because of the fact that there are aspects of the cases in the two courts that are different and therefore I did not understand counsel for the plaintiff to say that one set of pretrial examinations could definitely suffice. But he did indicate to me that he saw merit to attempting, as far as possible, to be as efficient as possible with respect to pretrial discoveries. Counsel for the defendants who are applicants before me today, I believe, agreed to the same type of approach, insofar as being as efficient as possible is concerned. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Counsel also agreed that there would have to be pretrial conferences in the Ontario Court General Division and I expect that there would be a pretrial conference in this court. At those pretrial conferences, I would expect the parties and the courts to attempt to work out proceedings once they get to that stage, so that they are done in the most efficient way possible while at the same time ensuring that the rights of the parties are maintained and that prejudice does not accrue to parties. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  For the foregoing reasons then, I will deny the application and will ask counsel at this point if they want to speak to the matter of costs. Costs of course with respect to this motion. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  I will award costs in any event of the cause to the plaintiff and defendants by counterclaim on this motion. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/blk 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



