 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Ladislav Kina, Nicolas Kina, Patrik Kina and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 284)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Russell, J.
March 21, 2014.
Counsel:
Dushahi Sribavan, for the applicants;
Nicole Paduraru, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Rocco Galati Law Firm, Professional Corporation, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
INTRODUCTION
[1]
Russell, J.
: This is an application under subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [Act] for judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [RPD or Board], dated October 18, 2012 [Decision], which refused the Applicants' application to be deemed Convention refugees or a persons in need of protection under sections 96 and 97 of the Act.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The Applicants are citizens of the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic and are of Roma ethnicity. They came to Canada via Frankfurt on April 4, 2009, and applied for refugee protection upon their arrival in Toronto. They claim to have been attacked on several occasions because they are Roma, and allege a well-founded fear of persecution based on race and nationality if they are returned to their countries of nationality.
[3]
The Principal Applicant, Ladislav Kina [Mr. Kina], is a 36-year-old citizen of the Czech Republic. He says that he has experienced problems due to his Roma ethnicity from the time he was a child, including being physically attacked many times. He completed grade nine and wanted to be educated as a bricklayer, but was only able to complete three months of the training because older students harassed and assaulted him until he could no longer continue. Thereafter, he says he had trouble getting work, as prospective employers would turn him down once they found out he was Roma.
[4]
Renata Kinova [Ms. Kinova] is Mr. Kina's wife. She is a citizen of the Slovak Republic and a permanent resident of the Czech Republic. She alleges that she and her family were attacked and called names such as "black pig" and "black faces" by their neighbours in the Slovak Republic, and were badly beaten in their home by a group of masked men in 2003. This prompted them to leave for the Czech Republic, where she met and married Mr. Kina. They have two sons born in the Czech Republic, aged 6 and 7 [the Minor Applicants], and another son born after their arrival in Canada.
[5]
Mr. Kina and Ms. Kinova say they were physically attacked by skinheads in 2006, while Ms. Kinova was pregnant, and that Mr. Kina was again attacked at a bus stop in 2007 by skinheads who screamed "die you black pig" and "we are going to liquidate you from this world." They claim to have slept in the forest with their children because they were afraid of the skinheads. In the summer of 2008, Mr. Kina says he and his son were spat on and yelled at by "not only the skinheads but white Czechs also," who yelled "gypsies to the gas chamber, you will end up like the Jews and the blacks." He says he was scared for his son's life and ran for safety, with his son frightened and crying. He claims that he was once again beaten up by skinheads in 2009 while returning from a friend's house, and onlookers simply walked away and did not call the police.
[6]
Mr. Kina claimed in his personal information form  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that each time he was attacked he reported it to the police, and the police took down reports but never dealt with the incidents. The Applicants heard that Canada was accepting Roma refugee claimants, and say they came because they were scared for their lives and did not want their children to grow up in fear.
[7]
At the hearing before the Board, Mr. Kina was appointed the designated representative of his wife and children. Ms. Kinova also testified briefly.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[8]
The RPD found that none of the Applicants was a refugee or a person in need of protection. The Board identified the determinative issues as credibility, delay in departure, and state protection.
[9]
On state protection, the Board outlined principles from the case law, including that states are presumed to be capable of protecting their citizens, that claimants can rebut this presumption with clear and convincing evidence that a state is incapable of protecting its citizens, that the onus is on the claimant to approach the state for protection where it might be reasonably forthcoming, and that no government is expected to guarantee perfect protection to all of its citizens at all times. The Board stated that local failures to provide protection do not mean that a state on the whole fails to protect its citizens, and that the burden for a claimant to prove an absence of state protection is directly proportional to the level of democracy in a state. It noted that "[w]hile the effectiveness of state protection is a relevant consideration, the preponderance of recent Federal Court decisions has held that the test for a finding of state protection is whether the protection is adequate, rather than effective per se."
[10]
The Board found that there were many inconsistencies and contradictions in Mr. Kina's testimony, and an absence of any corroborative evidence that was entitled to much weight. A medical report provided by the Applicants contained only general statements regarding attacks sustained in 2002, 2005, 2006 and 2007. No details or supporting medical reports describing the extent or circumstances of the injuries were provided, and the Board found that some of the dates did not correspond to Mr. Kina's testimony. As a result, "little weight" was accorded to this medical report. The Board also noted a letter from the Roma Association of Liberec describing a 2006 attack and dealings with the police, but observed that "no actual medical or police reports were submitted with respect to this incident."
[11]
The Board found inconsistencies in Mr. Kina's testimony and his PIF on the issue of employment. Mr. Kina claimed he had trouble obtaining work, but acknowledged he was employed in construction between 2005 and 2009. This contradicted his PIF, which stated that he had no employment during these years.
[12]
With respect to the 2007 incident, the Board noted Mr. Kina's testimony that he had written to a Roma organization to obtain the police report but to no avail, and that he had not retained a copy of the letter he sent. The Board rejected this testimony, citing the instructions to claimants in question 31 of the PIF to provide any corroborating evidence to support their claims.
[13]
The Board noted that it had asked Mr. Kina what was the pivotal incident that led to his departure from the Czech Republic, and he responded that it was the 2006 incident, but the Applicants did not leave at that time due to lack of resources. Mr. Kina testified at the hearing that he knew one of the perpetrators, who was the son of the police chief, and that when he complained the police chief took him to the forest, drew his gun and threatened to shoot him, but none of this was in his PIF. Given the severity of this purported event, the fact that Mr. Kina described the 2006 event as the one that caused him to decide to leave the Czech Republic, and that he was unable when challenged to explain its absence from the PIF, the Board rejected "this entire portion of the principal claimant's testimony." Mr. Kina's testimony that this incident caused him to collapse psychologically and to need medication was also rejected as an effort to embellish his claim, given that this too was missing from his PIF and he could not explain why.
[14]
With respect to the 2009 incident, the RPD observed a contradiction between Mr. Kina's statement in his PIF that he went to the police "every time" he was attacked and his hearing testimony that he did not go to the police following the 2009 incident because he believed from prior experience that no results would ensue. The Board then observed that, in response to questions from his own counsel at the hearing, Mr. Kina insisted that he had gone to the police after this incident but did not know if they have attempted to arrest the perpetrators. The Board rejected this portion of Mr. Kina's testimony as a result of these contradictions.
[15]
On the basis of the contradictions the RPD observed in Mr. Kina's evidence, the omissions from his PIF, and the absence of corroborative evidence to which weight could be assigned, the Board found that Mr. Kina's testimony was lacking in credibility.
[16]
The Board did not make any negative credibility findings regarding Ms. Kinova's testimony, but did note that she did not provide corroborating evidence relating to the 2003 incident, and did not know why her family was targeted. Unlike her oral testimony, her PIF amendment did not state that the family went to the police following this incident.
[17]
The Board then turned to the documentary evidence regarding country conditions in the Czech Republic, with respect to Mr. Kina and the Minor Applicants' claims, and the Slovak Republic with respect to Ms. Kinova's claim. The Board observed that there was documentary evidence of persecution of Roma in the Czech Republic and the rise of right-wing and neo-Nazi groups who advocate a solution to "the Roma problem" by force if necessary, and that "[t]he question becomes one of what the state is doing to protect the Roma against such harm."
[18]
The RPD noted evidence that attacks on the Roma minority had declined, as well as contrary evidence that racially motivated attacks on minorities in the Czech Republic were on the rise. The Board also noted evidence that the Roma are subject to public and private discrimination in education, housing, health and employment, and ill-treatment from police. On the other hand, there was evidence that the Czech Republic was a multiparty parliamentary democracy, that its laws provide for a right to a fair trial, that police are required by law to respond to all distress calls, and that complainants are entitled to copies of police reports. The Board also noted examples of protection measures against discrimination and racially-motivated violence, such as Roma Police Assistants and Minority Liaison Officers, and recent strengthening of the Czech legal and institutional framework against discrimination, racism and extremism as well as efforts being made by the Czech government to improve the integration of Roma children into the mainstream education system. The Board concluded that "[g]iven the principal claimant's lack of credibility, and the preponderance of the evidence before this panel, the panel concludes the principal claimant has not rebutted the presumption of state protection."
[19]
With respect to the Slovak Republic, the Board observed that the documentary evidence indicated that the state was in control of its territory and there was "no evidence of a total breakdown of state authority," and therefore "the burden of attempting to show that one should not be required to exhaust all avenues of domestic recourse is a heavy one." The Board found that "[t]he preponderance of the objective evidence regarding current country conditions suggests that, although not perfect, there is adequate state protection in the Slovak Republic for victims of crime, that the Slovak Republic is making serious efforts to address the problem of criminality, and that police are both willing and able to protect victims." Further, the Board found that "[p]olice corruption and deficiencies, although existing and noted by the Board, are not systemic," and that "as a whole, the issues of corruption and deficiencies are being addressed by the Slovak Republic." Examples quoted from the documentary evidence indicated that "on the whole, the Slovak Republic has undertaken significant efforts to provide better protection to its citizens and is making serious effort [sic] to combat corruption." In the Board's view, Ms. Kinova "did not provide 'clear and convincing' evidence of the Slovak Republic's inability to protect her," and there was no persuasive evidence that the 2003 incident "was necessarily linked to her ethnicity, rather than being a random crime."
[20]
On the whole, the Board concluded as follows:
[48] The Board concludes that the claimants have not rebutted the presumption of state protection with "clear and convincing" evidence of the state's inability to protect them.
[49] After carefully considering all of the evidence in the PIF, the oral testimony, and the submissions made on behalf of the claimants, all claims are rejected. This includes the children's claims as they are based on the principal claimant's allegations.
ISSUES
[21]
The Applicants raise the following issues in this application:
1. Whether the RPD erred in making negative credibility findings based on an absence of corroborating evidence;
2. Whether the RPD erred in making findings based on a lack of "further" corroborating evidence with respect to the claim of Ms. Kinova;
3. Whether the RPD erred in making findings based on what the medical reports "did not say";
4. Whether the RPD made perverse and capricious findings with respect to credibility based on alleged inconsistencies arising from the PIF and amendments thereto; and
5. With respect to the determinative issue of state protection, whether the RPD:
(a) Applied the wrong legal test, including a failure to consider ability to protect in addition to willingness to protect; or
(b) Made perverse and capricious findings in disregard to the evidence in its application of the test.
[22]
In my view, the issues here can be summarized as follows: did the Board err in its conclusions regarding credibility, state protection or nexus to a Convention ground in a manner that makes the Decision unreasonable?
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[23]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] held that a standard of review analysis need not be conducted in every instance. Instead, where the standard of review applicable to a particular question before the court is settled in a satisfactory manner by past jurisprudence, the reviewing court may adopt that standard of review. Only where this search proves fruitless, or where the relevant precedents appear to be inconsistent with new developments in the common law principles of judicial review, must the reviewing court undertake a consideration of the four factors comprising the standard of review analysis:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[24]
As outlined recently by Chief Justice Crampton, a long line of jurisprudence has established a clear test for state protection. It is therefore not open to the Board to apply a different test, and the issue of whether the proper test was applied is reviewable on a standard of correctness. On the other hand, the issue of whether the Board erred in applying the settled law on state protection to the facts of a particular case is a question of mixed fact and law that is reviewable on a standard of reasonableness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; see also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[25]
The other issues raised by the Applicants relate to the Board's assessment, interpretation and weighing of the evidence, as well as its conclusions about Mr. Kina's credibility. It is well established that the Board's conclusions on these matters are entitled to deference and a standard of reasonableness applies:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA) at para 4 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[26]
When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the analysis will be concerned with "the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process [and also with] whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law." See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 47, and
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para59. Put another way, the Court should intervene only if the Decision was unreasonable in the sense that it falls outside the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law."
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
[27]
The following provisions of the Act are applicable in these proceedings:
Convention refugee
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a)
is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in need of protection
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(
a
) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(
b
) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
Définition de « réfugié »
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays don't elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays don't elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
ARGUMENT <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [28]
The Applicants argue that the Board erred by making negative credibility findings based on a lack of corroborating documentary evidence. Oral evidence regarding the particulars of a claim does not have to be corroborated by documentary evidence, they argue, and the absence of such documentary evidence has no bearing on the claimant's credibility in the absence of evidence to contradict the claimant's allegations:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  99 NR 168 (FCA) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FTR 137;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FTR 309 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . This means that, "conclusions relating to a lack of credibility may not be drawn from an absence of evidence":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It was a further error for the Board to make negative credibility findings based on what the medical report submitted by the Applicants did not say, rather than considering it for what it did say in support of the Applicants' allegations: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 11. The Board also erred in making negative credibility findings based on the fact that the PIF was amended:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[29]
The Applicants say the crux of the Decision is the Board's state protection finding, which requires an objective assessment of the well-foundedness of the their fear
regardless
of credibility findings: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ACWS (3d) 1089 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[30]
Here, the Applicants say, the Board failed to apply the proper test to the question of state protection. A claimant is not required to seek ineffective protection merely to demonstrate its ineffectiveness. Rather, they must approach the state for protection only where it might have been reasonable forthcoming:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 724-25 [
Ward
]. The capability of a state to protect its citizens is simply a presumption that can be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect, and such evidence can include "testimony of similarly situated individuals let down by the state protection arrangement or the claimant's testimony of past personal incidents in which sate protection did not materialize":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2002] FCJ No 1080 (TD) at para 42, quoting
Ward
, above at 724-25.
[31]
Furthermore, the Applicants argue, it is an error for the Board to adopt a purely systemic approach that could deny protection solely on the ground that the state is making efforts to protect the Roma from persecution and discrimination: the ability to protect encompasses not only a legislative and procedural framework but "the capacity and will to effectively implement that framework":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 56, quoting
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Applicants argue that the Board erred in failing to deal with the "second arm" of the test for state protection - that is, the state's
ability
to protect, rather than merely its willingness to protect. They quote Justice Hughes' analysis in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] at paras 5-6:
5 The reasons do not address the issue of state protection properly. They do not show whether, and if so, what, the Member considered as to provisions made by Hungary to provide adequate state protection now to its citizens. It is not enough to say that steps are being taken that some day may result in adequate state protection. It is what state protection is
actually provided
at the
present time
that is relevant. In the present case, the evidence is overwhelming that Hungary is unable presently to provide adequate protection to its Roma citizens. [...]
6 To this I add what Justice Mosley wrote recently in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> to 16:
[...]
15 The Board was required to justify its finding that Ms. E.Y.M.V. had not rebutted the presumption, in a transparent and intelligible way (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] F.C.J. No. 996 at para 17). The Board did not meet this standard of reasonableness.
16 The Board did not provide any analysis of the operational adequacy of the efforts undertaken by the government of Honduras and international actors to improve state protection in Honduras. While the state's efforts are indeed relevant to an assessment of state protection, they are neither determinative nor sufficient (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] F.C.J. No. 816 at para 75). Any efforts must have "actually translated into adequate state protection" at the operational level (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[32]
Furthermore, the Applicants assert, "[d]emocracy alone does not guarantee effective state protection" and the "Board is required to do more than determine whether a country has a democratic political system and must assess the quality of the institutions that provide state protection":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[33]
The Applicants note that these principles have been applied to the situation of the Roma in many cases, including
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paras 5-7;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[34]
The Applicants argue that the RPD ignored evidence, including the Applicants' credible oral and personal documentary evidence, the fact that the police are often the agents of persecution, the documentary evidence tendered by the Applicants' counsel, and the Board's own disclosure packages relating to the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic. In their view, the Decision should be set aside for ignoring or making selective use of the evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Imm LR (3d) 35 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ACWS (3d) 285 (TD). Where there is important evidence that contradicts the Board's conclusions, the requirement for the Board to specifically analyze that evidence is heightened and the failure to do so may cause the Court to conclude that the Board ignored or misapprehended it:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FCT 398 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 33 (TD).
Respondent
[35]
The Respondent says that the Board's rejection of the Applicants' claims was justified based on the credibility problems identified and the Board's finding that the Applicants had failed to rebut the presumption of state protection.
[36]
The Respondent notes that the Board identified major credibility issues with the Applicants' evidence, stemming from significant and unexplained omissions and inconsistencies among Mr. Kina's PIF, the amended PIF, and his testimony at the hearing. For example, he testified that he had difficulty finding work due to his Roma ethnicity, but was employed in construction from 2005 to 2009. This directly contradicted his PIF, where he wrote that he was not employed during those years. With respect to the 2006 incident, which convinced the Mr. Kina to leave the Czech Republic, he testified that he knew the perpetrator, which was the son of the police chief, that he was taken to the forest and threatened at gunpoint, that he collapsed psychologically and required medication after this incident, and that he and his family had to sleep in the forest afterwards because the perpetrators threatened to kill the Applicants. However, none of this information was in his PIF or amended PIF, and Mr. Kina could not explain why it was missing. He also could not remember the month this pivotal event occurred. Mr. Kina's evidence with respect to reporting to police was also rife with contradictions. He testified that, after 2003, he sought assistance from the police more than 15 times; however, this was not reflected in his PIF, which described only five incidents, and he could not explain the discrepancy. With respect to the alleged attack in 2009, he claimed in his PIF that the police wrote a report, then stated in testimony that he did not go to police as he did not believe any action would be taken.
[37]
The Respondent says the Board was justified in observing that there was an absence of corroborating evidence for the Applicants' claims. The medical report contained only general statements regarding alleged attacks, and some of the dates mentioned did not correspond to Mr. Kina's testimony. It was reasonable for the Board to give this document little weight, and it is not the function of the Court to reweigh or reconsider the evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA). In addition, while the Applicants submitted a letter from the Roma Association of Liberec regarding an attack on the Applicants in 2006, there were no actual medical or police reports submitted. It was not unreasonable for the Board to expect such evidence in this case, given that the letter mentioned dealings with the police and Mr. Kina testified that he required medication. The Board can take into account a failure to provide corroborative evidence where there are valid reasons to doubt a claimant's credibility and the Board does not accept the applicant's explanation for failing to produce that evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . While corroborating evidence is not always necessary to establish an applicant's subjective fear, it is not an error for the Board find that a failure to corroborate the claim with evidence that could reasonably be expected diminishes an applicant's credibility. A lack of acceptable documents without a reasonable explanation for their absence, or the failure to take reasonable steps to obtain them, is a factor in assessing the credibility of any claimant:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Moreover, the presumption that sworn testimony is true can be rebutted by the absence of corroborative evidence where, as here, it would be reasonable to expect such evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  53 ACWS (3d) 158 (FCA) at para 1.
[38]
The Respondent says that on the basis of the evidence, the Board reasonably rejected Mr. Kina's testimony regarding the alleged 2006 and 2009 attacks, and found that he had otherwise attempted to embellish his claim. The importance of consistency between evidence in one's PIF and oral testimony is well-established, and inconsistencies and omissions, particularly regarding crucial elements of a claim, are sufficient to taint credibility:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCTD) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 9. Mr. Kina led inconsistent evidence that went to the core of his claim and the RPD reasonably disregarded evidence on which he contradicted himself, the Respondent says. The Board's analysis focused on key events in the Applicants' story; it was not a "microscopic" parsing of minor details:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Board is in the best position to gauge credibility and draw the necessary inferences, and its decision is entitled to deference: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 4.
[39]
Finally, the Respondent argues that the Board's state protection findings were reasonable. The Board began its state protection analysis by correctly setting out the law with reference to the relevant jurisprudence, and carefully considered the documentary evidence pertaining to the situation of Roma in the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic. The Board recognized problems such as ongoing discrimination and corruption in both countries, and was thus clearly cognizant of the evidence that was contradictory to its conclusion on state protection. The Board considered and weighed negative reports, including those submitted by the Applicants, and was not required to refer to each element from each piece of general country condition evidence. The question is whether, in examining the record as a whole, the decision is reasonable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Moreover, the Board's duty to expressly refer to evidence that contradicts its key findings, as per
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[40]
The test for state protection is whether it is adequate, the Respondent argues, not whether it is perfectly effective:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; see also
Canada (Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 7. The reasons show that the Board had regard not only to the
efforts
of the Czech Republic in combating discrimination, but also the evidence of
implementation
and the
effects
of such efforts: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paras 15-18. Contrary to the Applicant's argument that the RPD did not deal with the state's
inability
to protect them, the Board clearly found that the Applicants had not rebutted the presumption of state protection with "'clear and convincing evidence' of the state's
inability
to protect them": Decision at para 48, Respondent's emphasis. Insofar as the Board referred to "serious efforts" by the governments concerned, it referred to these efforts as part of assessing the adequacy of state protection:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[41]
The Respondent argues that significant deference is owed to the RPD's findings of adequate state protection, and the Board's conclusions on this matter were reasonable.
ANALYSIS
[42]
The basis of this Decision is not entirely clear. The Board refers to "credibility, delay in departure, and state protection" as the determinative issues (para 9). However, the reasons concentrate upon credibility and state protection.
[43]
As regards Mr. Kina, the Board "finds that the principal claimant's testimony was lacking in credibility" (para 26), but it is not clear whether this is a general negative credibility finding. Paragraph 47 suggests not because the general conclusion with regard to Mr. Kina is that "significant portions of the Principal claimant's testimony found to be (sic) lacking in credibility." This suggests that some parts of Mr. Kina's evidence were accepted. So the extent of the credibility findings regarding Mr. Kina are unclear. However, the actual basis for the Decision regarding Mr. Kina appears to be that
Given the principal claimant's lack of credibility, and the preponderance of the evidence before the panel, the panel concludes the principal claimant has not rebutted the presumption of state protection.
[44]
So, in the end, the credibility concerns appear to be part of the state protection analysis which gives us the real reason for rejecting Mr. Kina's claim. The headings of the reasons also indicate this is the case. My conclusion is that the Board found significant portions of Mr. Kina's evidence non-credible, and because parts of that evidence related to the interaction between Mr. Kina and the police, these credibility findings were a significant aspect of the state protection analysis.
[45]
As regards Ms. Kinova, there are no negative credibility findings. Her claim is rejected because she was not able to rebut the presumption of state protection (para 28). However, it would also appear that the Board found a lack of nexus because, in paragraph 47, the Board says
Furthermore, the Board concludes that the principal claimant's wife, although describing an incident which occurred in 2003, did not provide "clear and convincing evidence of the Slovak Republic's inability to protect her. Moreover, there was no persuasive evidence before this panel that this incident was necessarily linked to her ethnicity, rather than being a random crime.
[46]
However, this paragraph is then followed by paragraph 48 which says
The Board concludes that the claimant's have not rebutted the presumption of state protection with "clear and convincing" evidence of the state's inability to protect them.
[47]
So, the Board's final conclusion appears to be that the claims are rejected on the basis of the state protection analysis rather than credibility or nexus issues, although credibility and nexus concerns are factored into the state protection analysis. The reasons overall appear to support this conclusion.
[48]
The state protection analyses for both Mr. Kina and Ms. Kinova are entirely inadequate and unreasonable for reasons that this Court has reiterated on many occasions. See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paras 69-74 (Slovak Republic); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above (Hungary); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above (Hungary); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paras 11-13 (Hungary); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paras 23-25 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Hungary).
[49]
As regards Mr. Kina, the state protection analysis, as is typical, concedes the difficulties that Roma people face in the Czech Republic but then makes attempts to show that the state is making "efforts" to resolve the problems. There is no real analysis of whether such efforts have resulted in what Justice Mosley in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  has called "operational adequacy," and a significant portion of the analysis deals with discrimination in education, which has no relevance to the credibility finding about interaction with the police and whether the Czech Republic is either willing or able to protect the Applicants from racist violence.
[50]
There are similar problems with respect to the Board's state protection analysis for the Slovak Republic, which is the country of reference for Ms. Kinova. For example, paragraph 13 refers to "adequate state protection in the Slovak Republic for victims of crime," because "the Slovak Republic is making serious efforts to address the problem of criminality," and "the police are both willing and able to protect victims." This suggests that the Board's focus is upon crime victims generally, and not the specific problems faced by Roma. In any event, the documentary evidence cited by the Board to support this statement (paras 44-45) either has little relevance for Roma people or supports the Applicants' contention that there is no adequate protection for Roma in the Slovak Republic. For example, the Board quotes that
Human rights observers believed that police are occasionally reluctant to accept the testimony of certain witnesses, particularly Roma women, and homeless persons and
often failed to investigate cases involving Roma and other minorities promptly and thoroughly.
[Emphasis added]
[51]
The only other references to the treatment of Roma in the Slovak Republic referred to and relied upon are (quoted at para 45)
The government made efforts to address violence and discrimination against Roma and other minorities, although some critics worried that judges lacked sufficient training in the relevant laws. The government continued to implement its action plan against xenophobia and intolerance, which included a special police unit to monitor extremist activities. A commission consisting of NGO's, police, and government officials advised police on minority issues.
The plenipotentiary maintained five regional offices to supervise the implementation of governmental police on Romani issues, support infrastructure development, and cooperate with municipalities and villages to improve interaction between Roma and non-Roma. During the year, the government had a national anti-discriminatory plan. The office of the deputy prime-minister for human rights serves as the secretariat for the Council of National Minorities and the Government Council for NGOs.
[52]
Based upon this, the Board then concludes "[t]he above-noted examples indicate that, on the whole, the Slovak Republic has undertaken significant efforts to provide better protection for its citizens and is making serious efforts to combat corruption." (para 46) There is no real analysis of what this means for Roma people and there is no analysis as to whether these "serious efforts" have resulted in any kind of operationally adequate protection for Roma people against racist violence in the Slovak Republic. This is not a reasonable state protection analysis.
[53]
The onus is, of course, upon the Applicants to rebut the presumption of state protection, but if the Board does not reasonably assess operational adequacy, then the Board cannot assess whether the Applicants, given the totality of the evidence, have rebutted that presumption.
[54]
Counsel agree there is no question for certification and the Court concurs.
JUDGMENT
[55]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
1. The application is allowed. The Decision is quashed and the matter is returned for reconsideration by a differently constituted Board.
2. There is no question for certification.
.........................
Ladislav Kina, Nicolas Kina,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Russell
[Traduction]: Il s'agit d'une demande présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [la Loi] en vue du contrôle judiciaire de la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié [la SPR ou la Commission], datée du 18 octobre 2012 [la décision], par laquelle était rejetée la demande d'asile des demandeurs à titre de réfugiés au sens de la Convention ou de personnes à protéger aux termes des articles 96 et 97 de la Loi.
CONTEXTE
[2]
Les demandeurs sont des citoyens de la République tchèque et de la République slovaque, d'origine ethnique rom. Ils sont arrivés au Canada le 4 avril 2009, après être passés par Francfort, et ils ont fait une demande d'asile, dès leur arrivée à Toronto. Ils allèguent avoir été agressés à plusieurs reprises parce qu'ils sont des Roms et ils allèguent craindre avec raison d'être persécutés du fait de leur race et de leur nationalité s'ils sont renvoyés dans les pays dont ils ont la nationalité.
[3]
Le demandeur principal, Ladislav Kina [M. Kina], citoyen de la République tchèque, est âgé de 36 ans. Il a dit avoir vécu des problèmes à cause de son origine ethnique rome à partir de son enfance, notamment de nombreuses agressions. Après sa dernière année d'études, il voulait apprendre le métier de briqueteur, mais il n'a pu suivre la formation que pendant trois mois parce que des étudiants plus âgés l'ont harcelé et l'ont agressé jusqu'à ce qu'il abandonne. Par la suite, dit-il, il a eu de la difficulté à trouver du travail étant donné que les employeurs refusaient de l'embaucher lorsqu'ils constataient qu'il était un Rom.
[4]
Renata Kinova [Mme Kinova] est l'épouse de M. Kina. Elle est citoyenne de la République slovaque et résidente permanente de la République tchèque. Elle allègue qu'elle-même et sa famille ont été agressés et traités de [traduction] « sales cochons » et de « bronzés » par leurs voisins dans la République slovaque et qu'ils ont été sauvagement battus à leur domicile par un groupe d'hommes masqués en 2003. C'est ce qui les a amenés à se rendre en République tchèque, où elle-même a rencontré et épousé M. Kina. Le couple a deux fils âgés de 6 et de 7 ans [les demandeurs mineurs], qui sont nés en République tchèque, et un autre fils né après leur arrivée au Canada.
[5]
M. Kina et Mme Kinova disent qu'ils ont été agressés par des skinheads en 2006, à l'époque où Mme Kinova était enceinte, et que M. Kina a été agressé de nouveau à un arrêt d'autobus en 2007 par des skinheads qui lui avaient crié [traduction] « à mort sale cochon » et « nous allons vous faire disparaître de la surface de la terre ». Ils allèguent avoir dormi dans la forêt avec leurs enfants par crainte des skinheads. M. Kina déclare qu'à l'été 2008 [traduction] « non seulement des skinheads, mais aussi de simples citoyens tchèques de race blanche » leur ont craché dessus et leur ont crié des insultes comme « les Tsiganes dans les fours crématoires, vous finirez comme les Juifs et les Noirs ». Il déclare qu'il a craint pour la vie de son fils et qu'il s'est réfugié dans un endroit sûr, avec son fils qui était effrayé et qui pleurait. Il allègue avoir été battu une autre fois par des skinheads en 2009 alors qu'il revenait chez lui après avoir rendu visite à un ami et que les passants ont simplement quitté les lieux, sans prévenir la police.
[6]
M. Kina a allégué dans son formulaire de renseignements personnels  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  qu'il avait signalé à la police chaque agression, que les policiers prenaient note de ses plaintes, mais qu'ils n'y avaient jamais donné suite. Les demandeurs ont entendu dire que le Canada acceptait les demandeurs d'asile d'origine rome; ils ont dit être venus au Canada parce qu'ils estimaient que leur vie était menacée et qu'ils ne voulaient pas que leurs enfants grandissent dans la peur.
[7]
À l'audience devant la Commission, M. Kina a été nommé représentant désigné de sa femme et de ses enfants. Mme Kinova a aussi témoigné brièvement.
DÉCISION FAISANT L'OBJET DU CONTRÔLE
[8]
La SPR a estimé qu'aucun des demandeurs n'était un réfugié au sens de la Convention ou une personne à protéger. Selon la Commission, les questions déterminantes concernaient la crédibilité, le délai écoulé avant de quitter le pays et la question de la protection de l'État.
[9]
En ce qui a trait à la protection de l'État, la Commission a exposé les principes pertinents tirés de la jurisprudence, notamment: les États sont présumés être en mesure de protéger leurs citoyens; les demandeurs peuvent réfuter cette présomption au moyen d'éléments de preuve convaincants permettant d'établir qu'un État est incapable de protéger ses citoyens; il incombe au demandeur de demander la protection de l'État lorsque cette dernière peut raisonnablement être offerte; et aucun gouvernement n'est réputé être en mesure de garantir une protection parfaite, en tout temps, à tous ses citoyens. La Commission a indiqué que l'incapacité des autorités à l'échelle locale d'offrir une protection ne signifie pas que l'État dans son ensemble n'arrive pas à protéger ses citoyens, et que le fardeau qui incombe à un demandeur de prouver l'absence de protection de l'État est directement proportionnel au degré de démocratie dans l'État en cause. Elle a souligné que « [m]ême si l'efficacité de la protection de l'État est un aspect pertinent à prendre en considération, la prépondérance des décisions rendues récemment par la Cour fédérale a établi que le critère permettant d'évaluer la protection de l'État consiste à déterminer si la protection est adéquate, et non pas si elle est efficace ».
[10]
La Commission a relevé de nombreuses incohérences et contradictions dans le témoignage de M. Kina et l'absence de toute preuve corroborante à laquelle un certain poids aurait pu être accordé. Un rapport médical fourni par les demandeurs ne contenait que des renseignements généraux au sujet d'agressions subies en 2002, en 2005, en 2006 et en 2007. Aucun renseignement précis ni aucun rapport médical pertinent décrivant la nature des blessures ou le contexte dans lequel elles avaient été infligées n'ont été fournis, et la Commission a estimé que certaines des dates ne concordaient pas avec ce qui avait été mentionné au cours du témoignage de M. Kina. Par conséquent, elle a accordé « peu de poids » à ce rapport médical. La Commission a aussi fait mention d'une lettre de l'association des Roms de Liberec qui décrit une agression survenue en 2006 et les démarches effectuées auprès de la police, mais elle a fait observer qu'« aucun rapport médical ni aucun rapport de police n'[avaient] été présentés relativement à cet incident ».
[11]
La Commission a constaté l'existence d'incohérences entre le témoignage de M. Kina et son FRP sur la question de l'emploi. En effet, M. Kina a allégué avoir eu de la difficulté à trouver du travail, mais il a reconnu qu'il avait travaillé dans le domaine de la construction entre 2005 et 2009. Cette déclaration contredisait celles qui figuraient dans son FRP, dans lequel il était écrit qu'il n'avait pas travaillé pendant ces années-là.
[12]
En ce qui a trait à l'incident de 2007, la Commission a souligné que M. Kina avait déclaré avoir écrit à une organisation rome pour obtenir le rapport de police, mais sans succès, et qu'il n'avait pas conservé de copie de la lettre qu'il avait envoyée. La Commission a rejeté ce témoignage, citant les directives fournies aux demandeurs à la question 31 du FRP, selon lesquelles ils doivent fournir des éléments de preuve à l'appui de leurs allégations.
[13]
La Commission a souligné avoir demandé à M. Kina de préciser l'incident déclencheur qui avait entraîné son départ de la République tchèque et il a répondu que c'était l'incident de 2006, mais qu'ils n'avaient pas quitté le pays à ce moment-là à cause d'un manque de ressources. M. Kina a déclaré à l'audience qu'il connaissait un des auteurs de l'agression, soit le fils du chef de police, et qu'au moment où il s'était plaint au poste de police, le chef de la police l'avait emmené dans la forêt et avait pointé son arme contre lui en menaçant de le tuer; cependant, aucun de ces renseignements ne figurait dans son FRP. Étant donné la gravité de cet incident allégué, le fait que M. Kina ait décrit les événements de 2006 comme une des causes principales de sa décision de quitter la République tchèque et le fait qu'il avait été incapable d'expliquer l'absence de mention de cet incident dans son FRP, la Commission a rejeté « toute cette partie du témoignage du demandeur d'asile principal ». La déclaration de M. Kina selon laquelle cet incident l'avait détruit psychologiquement et l'avait obligé à prendre des médicaments a aussi été rejetée, la Commission ayant estimé qu'il s'agissait d'une tentative de rendre sa demande plus crédible, étant donné que ces faits n'étaient pas non plus mentionnés dans son FRP et qu'il n'avait pas été en mesure d'expliquer cette lacune.
[14]
En ce qui a trait à l'incident de 2009, la SPR a constaté l'existence d'une contradiction entre la déclaration de M. Kina dans son FRP selon laquelle il était allé porter plainte à la police [traduction] « chaque fois » qu'il avait été agressé et son témoignage à l'audience selon lequel il n'était pas retourné porter plainte à la police après l'incident de 2009 parce qu'il avait l'impression, vu ses expériences antérieures, qu'il n'en résulterait rien. La Commission a aussi souligné que, en réponse à des questions de son propre conseil à l'audience, M. Kina avait insisté pour dire qu'il était allé porter plainte à la police après cet incident, mais qu'il ne savait pas si les policiers avaient tenté d'arrêter les auteurs de l'agression. À cause de ces contradictions, la Commission a rejeté cette portion du témoignage de M. Kina.
[15]
Vu les contradictions relevées par la SPR dans le témoignage de M. Kina, les omissions dans son FRP, et faute d'éléments de preuve corroborants auxquels la Commission aurait pu accorder du poids, cette dernière a conclu que le témoignage de M. Kina n'était pas crédible.
[16]
La Commission n'a pas tiré de conclusions négatives quant à la crédibilité de Mme Kinova, mais elle a souligné que cette dernière n'avait pas fourni d'éléments de preuve corroborants relatifs à l'incident de 2003 et qu'elle ne savait pas pour quelles raisons sa famille était ciblée. Contrairement à ce qu'elle a déclaré lors de son témoignage, il n'était pas question dans son FRP modifié du fait que la famille était allée porter plainte à la police après cet incident.
[17]
La Commission a ensuite pris connaissance de la preuve documentaire sur la situation en République tchèque relativement aux demandes de M. Kina et des demandeurs mineurs, et en République slovaque, en ce qui concerne la demande de Mme Kinova. La Commission a souligné qu'il existait une preuve documentaire concernant la persécution des Roms en République tchèque et la montée de la droite et des groupes néo-nazis qui prônent une solution « au problème rom » par la force si nécessaire, et indiqué qu' « [i]l faut donc maintenant se demander ce que fait l'État pour protéger les Roms contre un tel préjudice ».
[18]
La SPR a pris note de l'existence d'éléments de preuve selon lesquels les agressions contre la minorité rome avaient diminué de même que d'autres éléments de preuve qui, au contraire, établissaient que le nombre d'agressions à caractère racial contre les minorités en République tchèque étaient en hausse. La Commission a aussi relevé l'existence d'éléments de preuve selon lesquels les Roms sont victimes de discrimination, dans la sphère publique et privée, ainsi que dans les domaines de l'éducation, du logement, de la santé et de l'emploi, et sont parfois mal traités par la police. Par ailleurs, d'autres éléments de preuve établissaient que la République tchèque est une démocratie parlementaire multipartite, que ses lois confèrent le droit à un procès juste et exigent des policiers qu'ils répondent à tous les appels de détresse, et que les personnes qui déposent des plaintes ont le droit de recevoir une copie des rapports de police. La Commission a aussi donné des exemples de mesures de protection contre la discrimination et la violence raciales, notamment le fait qu'il y a des assistants de police roms et des agents de liaison des minorités, le fait que le cadre juridique et institutionnel tchèque contre la discrimination, le racisme et l'extrémisme avait récemment été renforcé, et les efforts déployés par le gouvernement tchèque pour améliorer l'intégration des enfants Roms au réseau d'éducation national. La Commission a tiré la conclusion suivante: « Compte tenu du manque de crédibilité du demandeur d'asile principal et de la prépondérance de la preuve à la disposition de la Commission, [celle] -ci conclut que le demandeur d'asile principal n'a pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État ».
[19]
En ce qui a trait à la République slovaque, la Commission a fait remarquer que la preuve documentaire révélait que l'État exerçait sa maîtrise sur l'ensemble du territoire, que « [r]ien ne démontra[it] qu'il y a effondrement complet de l'appareil étatique » et que, par conséquent, « le fardeau qu'a une personne d'établir qu'elle ne devrait pas avoir à épuiser tous les recours disponibles dans son pays est lourd ». La Commission a notamment tiré la conclusion suivante: « La prépondérance des éléments de preuve objectifs se rapportant aux conditions actuelles dans le pays démontre que, même si elle n'est pas parfaite, la protection offerte par la République slovaque aux victimes d'actes criminels est adéquate, que la République slovaque déploie de sérieux efforts pour régler les problèmes de criminalité, et que la police est disposée à protéger les victimes et en mesure de le faire ». De plus, « [l]a Commission souligne que, même s'il existe de la corruption et des lacunes au sein des services de police, il ne s'agit pas d'un problème systémique » et que « dans l'ensemble, la République slovaque s'occupe des problèmes de corruption et des lacunes ». Selon des exemples tirés de la preuve documentaire, « dans l'ensemble, la République slovaque a déployé des efforts considérables pour offrir une meilleure protection à ses citoyens et qu'elle fait de sérieux efforts pour lutter contre la corruption ». Selon la Commission, Mme Kinova « n'a pas fourni d'éléments de preuve "clairs et convaincants" de l'incapacité de la République slovaque d'assurer sa protection » et qu'elle ne disposait d'aucun élément de preuve convaincant établissant que l'incident de 2003 « était nécessairement en lien avec son ethnicité plutôt qu'un crime commis au hasard ».
[20]
Globalement, la Commission a conclu en ces termes:
[48] La Commission conclut que les demandeurs d'asile n'ont pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État au moyen d'éléments de preuve « clairs et convaincants » de l'incapacité de l'État d'assurer leur protection.
[49] Après avoir soigneusement examiné tous les éléments de preuve contenus dans le FRP, le témoignage de vive voix et les observations faites au nom des demandeurs d'asile, les demandes d'asile sont rejetées, y compris les demandes d'asile des enfants, car elles s'appuient sur les allégations du demandeur d'asile principal.
QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[21]
Les demandeurs soulèvent les questions ci-après dans leur demande:
1. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions négatives en matière de crédibilité fondées sur l'absence d'éléments de preuve corroborants?
2. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions fondées sur l'absence d'éléments de preuve corroborants « supplémentaires » eu égard à la demande de Mme Kinova?
3. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions fondées sur « ce qui ne figurait pas » dans les rapports médicaux?
4. La SPR a-t-elle tiré des conclusions absurdes et arbitraires en matière de crédibilité fondées sur des incohérences alléguées découlant du contenu des FRP et de leurs versions modifiées?
5. Eu égard à la question déterminante de la protection de l'État, est-ce que la SPR:
a) a appliqué le mauvais critère juridique, notamment en ne tenant pas compte de la capacité de protéger en plus de la volonté de protéger? Ou
b) a-t-elle tiré des conclusions absurdes et arbitraires sans tenir compte de la preuve lorsqu'elle a appliqué le critère?
[22]
À mon avis, les questions en l'espèce peuvent être résumées comme suit: est-ce que la Commission a commis une erreur en tirant ses conclusions relatives à la crédibilité, à la protection de l'État ou à l'absence de lien avec un des motifs de la Convention d'une façon qui rend la décision déraisonnable?
NORME DE CONTRÔLE
[23]
Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], la Cour suprême du Canada a déclaré qu'il n'est pas toujours nécessaire de se livrer à une analyse relative à la norme de contrôle. Ainsi, lorsque la norme de contrôle qui s'applique à la question particulière dont la cour est saisie a été établie de manière satisfaisante par la jurisprudence, il est loisible à la cour chargée du contrôle de l'adopter. Ce n'est que dans les cas où cette recherche s'avère infructueuse, ou si la jurisprudence semble devenue incompatible avec l'évolution récente des principes de la common law en matière de contrôle judiciaire, que la cour chargée du contrôle doit entreprendre l'examen des quatre facteurs entrant en jeu dans l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[24]
Comme l'a souligné récemment le juge en chef Crampton, une jurisprudence abondante a défini un critère précis en matière de protection de l'État. Il n'est donc pas loisible à la Commission d'appliquer un critère différent et la question de savoir si le critère approprié a été appliqué est susceptible de révision selon la norme de la décision correcte. Par ailleurs, la question de savoir si la Commission a commis une erreur en appliquant aux faits de l'espèce la jurisprudence bien fixée en matière de protection de l'État est une question mixte de fait et de droit susceptibles de contrôle selon la norme de la décision raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; voir aussi
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[25]
Les autres questions soulevées par les demandeurs concernent l'examen, l'interprétation et l'évaluation de la preuve par la Commission de même que ses conclusions au sujet de la crédibilité de M. Kina. Il est bien établi en droit que les conclusions de la Commission sur ces questions commandent la déférence et que c'est la norme de la décision raisonnable qui s'applique:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), au paragraphe 4 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[26]
Dans le cadre du contrôle d'une décision selon la norme de la décision raisonnable, l'analyse a trait « à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ». Voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47, et
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En d'autres termes, la Cour ne devrait intervenir que si la décision était déraisonnable en ce sens qu'elle n'appartient pas « aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ».
DISPOSITIONS LÉGISLATIVES PERTINENTES
[27]
Les dispositions suivantes de la Loi s'appliquent en l'espèce:
Définition de « réfugié »
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
Convention refugee
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in need of protection
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(
a
) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(
b
) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
ARGUMENTS
Demandeurs
[28]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions négatives en matière de crédibilité fondées sur l'absence de preuve documentaire corroborante. Les témoignages relatifs à des éléments précis d'une demande n'ont pas à être corroborés par une preuve documentaire, soutiennent-ils, et l'absence de telle preuve ne saurait avoir d'incidence sur l'évaluation de la crédibilité du demandeur en l'absence d'éléments de preuve contredisant les allégations de ce dernier:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  99 NR 168 (CAF) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FTR 137;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FTR 309 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Cela signifie que l'« absence de preuve n'autorise pas une conclusion de non-crédibilité »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La Commission a aussi commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions négatives en matière de crédibilité fondées sur ce qui ne figurait pas dans le rapport médical déposé en preuve par les demandeurs plutôt que sur ce qu'il disait à l'appui des allégations des demandeurs: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 11. La Commission a aussi commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions négatives en matière de crédibilité fondées sur le fait que le FRP avait été modifié:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[29]
Selon les demandeurs, l'essentiel de la décision se résume à la conclusion de la Commission relative à la protection de l'État, qui exige une évaluation objective du bien-fondé de leur crainte,
peu importe
les conclusions en matière de crédibilité: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ACWS (3d) 1089 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[30]
Selon les demandeurs, la Commission n'a pas appliqué le critère approprié en ce qui concerne la question de la protection de l'État. Un demandeur n'est pas tenu de solliciter la protection inefficace d'un État simplement pour démontrer cette inefficacité. En effet, il doit le faire uniquement lorsque cette protection aurait pu raisonnablement être assurée:
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, aux pages 724-725 [
Ward
]. La capacité d'un État de protéger ses citoyens est une présomption simple qui peut être réfutée par les demandeurs au moyen d'éléments de preuve clairs et convaincants établissant que l'État est incapable de les protéger, et cette preuve peut comprendre « le témoignage de personnes qui sont dans une situation semblable à la sienne et que les dispositions prises par l'État pour les protéger n'ont pas aidées, ou son propre témoignage au sujet d'incidents personnels antérieurs au cours desquels la protection de l'État ne s'est pas concrétisée »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2002] ACF no 1080 (CF 1re inst.), au paragraphe 42, citant
Ward
, précité, aux pages 724-725.
[31]
De plus, selon les demandeurs, la Commission a commis une erreur en adoptant une approche purement systémique qui pourrait entraîner le rejet d'une demande uniquement pour le motif que l'État déploie des efforts pour protéger les Roms contre les persécutions et la discrimination: le pouvoir protecteur de l'État ne tient pas seulement à l'existence d'un encadrement légal et procédural efficace, mais également à « la capacité et [à] la volonté d'en mettre les dispositions en œuvre »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 56, qui citait
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , à la page 121. Bien que la Cour ne puisse pas exiger que la protection de l'État soit d'une efficacité parfaite, « la protection doit tout de même avoir une certaine efficacité »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 18. Les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur du fait qu'elle n'a pas appliqué le « second volet » du critère relatif à la protection de l'État - c'est-à-dire la
capacité
de l'État de protéger plutôt que sa simple volonté de le faire. Ils citent l'analyse du juge Hughes dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], aux paragraphes 5-6:
[5] La question de la protection de l'État n'est pas analysée de manière appropriée dans les motifs du commissaire. Les motifs n'indiquent pas si le commissaire a tenu compte des mesures mises en place par la Hongrie pour offrir
actuellement
une protection de l'État suffisante à ses citoyens, ni s'il a procédé à l'examen en question, quelles sont ces mesures. Ce n'est pas suffisant de dire que des mesures sont prises en vue d'offrir un jour une protection suffisante de l'État. C'est la protection
concrète,
actuellement offerte
qui compte. La preuve établit de façon accablante en l'espèce que la Hongrie est actuellement incapable d'offrir une protection suffisante à ses citoyens Roms. [...]
[6] J'ajoute à cela ce que le juge Mosley a écrit récemment dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 16:
[...]
15 La Commission était tenue de justifier, de façon transparente et intelligible, sa conclusion selon laquelle Mme Varela n'avait pas réfuté la présomption (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 996, paragraphe 17). La Commission n'a pas respecté cette norme de la raisonnabilité.
16 La Commission n'a fourni aucune analyse quant au caractère satisfaisant des efforts concrets déployés par le gouvernement du Honduras et par les acteurs internationaux pour améliorer la protection de l'État au Honduras. Bien que les efforts déployés par un État soient effectivement pertinents quant à l'analyse de la protection de l'État, ils ne sont ni déterminants ni suffisants (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 816, paragraphe 75). Les efforts doivent avoir, dans les faits, « véritablement engendré une protection adéquate de l'État » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paragraphe 9).
[32]
De plus, les demandeurs font valoir que la démocratie « n'est qu'un indicateur de l'efficacité probable des institutions » et que « [l]a Commission est tenue de faire plus que de déterminer si un pays est doté d'un système politique démocratique et elle doit évaluer la qualité des institutions qui fournissent la protection de l'État »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[33]
Les demandeurs soulignent que ces principes ont été appliqués dans de nombreuses décisions à la situation des Roms, notamment:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, aux paragraphes 5-7;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[34]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la SPR n'a pas tenu compte d'éléments de preuve, y compris des portions de témoignage et des documents personnels crédibles, le fait que les policiers sont souvent des agents de persécution, la preuve documentaire soumise par le conseil des demandeurs de même que les documents à communiquer par la Commission relatifs à la République tchèque et à la République slovaque. Selon eux, la décision devrait être annulée parce que des éléments de preuve ont été écartés ou qu'un usage sélectif en a été fait:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Imm LR (3d) 35 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ACWS (3d) 285 (CFPI). Lorsque des éléments de preuve importants contredisent les conclusions de la Commission, l'obligation pour la Commission d'analyser précisément ces éléments de preuve est renforcée et le défaut de le faire peut amener la Cour à conclure que la Commission a écarté des éléments de preuve ou les a mal évalués:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FCT 398 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En l'espèce, affirment les demandeurs, la SPR s'est livrée à ce que la Cour a déjà décrit comme une analyse « superficielle » ou « sommaire »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 33 (CFPI).
Défendeur
[35]
Le défendeur affirme que le rejet par la Commission des demandes des demandeurs était justifié vu les problèmes de crédibilité recensés et la conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle les demandeurs n'avaient pas réussi à écarter la présomption de protection de l'État.
[36]
Le défendeur souligne que les principaux problèmes de crédibilité mentionnés par la Commission eu égard à la preuve des demandeurs résultaient d'incohérences importantes et inexpliquées entre le FRP de M. Kina, son FRP modifié et son témoignage à l'audience et d'omissions dans ceux-ci. Par exemple, il a déclaré avoir eu de la difficulté à trouver du travail à cause de son origine ethnique rome, mais il avait travaillé dans le domaine de la construction de 2005 à 2009. Cette déclaration contredisait directement son FRP, dans lequel il avait écrit qu'il n'avait pas travaillé pendant ces années-là. Eu égard à l'incident de 2006, qui a convaincu M. Kina de quitter la République tchèque, il a déclaré qu'il connaissait son auteur, soit le fils du chef de police, qu'il avait été emmené dans la forêt et menacé à la pointe d'une arme, qu'il s'était effondré psychologiquement et avait eu besoin de médicaments après cet incident et, enfin, que lui-même et les membres de sa famille avaient ensuite dû dormir dans la forêt parce que les auteurs de l'agression les menaçaient de mort. Cependant, aucun de ces renseignements ne figurait dans son FRP ou dans son FRP modifié, et M. Kina n'a pas pu expliquer l'absence de ces renseignements dans lesdits documents. Il ne pouvait pas non plus se rappeler le mois au cours duquel l'événement déclencheur s'était produit. Le témoignage de M. Kina au sujet des déclarations faites à la police comportait aussi de nombreuses contradictions. En effet, il a déclaré que, après 2003, il avait demandé l'aide de la police à plus de 15 reprises; cependant, il n'en était pas question dans son FRP, où seulement cinq incidents étaient décrits, et il a été incapable d'expliquer cet écart. En ce qui concerne l'agression alléguée de 2009, il a affirmé dans son FRP que la police avait établi un rapport puis, au cours de son témoignage, il a dit qu'il ne s'était pas adressé à la police étant donné qu'il ne croyait pas que des mesures seraient prises.
[37]
Le défendeur est d'avis que la Commission était fondée à conclure que les allégations des demandeurs n'étaient pas étayées par des éléments de preuve corroborants. Le rapport médical ne contenait que des énoncés à caractère général au sujet d'agressions alléguées et certaines des dates mentionnées ne correspondaient pas au contenu du témoignage de M. Kina. Il était donc raisonnable que la Commission accorde peu de poids à ce document et la Cour n'a pas pour mandat de réévaluer ou de réexaminer la preuve:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF). De plus, bien que les demandeurs aient incorporé au dossier une lettre de l'association des Roms de Liberec au sujet d'une agression dont les demandeurs auraient été victimes en 2006, aucun rapport médical ou rapport de police s'y rapportant n'ait été déposé en preuve. Il n'était pas déraisonnable de la part de la Commission de s'attendre à ce que ce genre d'éléments de preuve soit produit en l'espèce étant donné que la lettre faisait état de contacts avec la police et que M. Kina avait déclaré avoir besoin de médicaments. La Commission peut tenir compte du défaut de fournir des éléments de preuve corroborants lorsqu'il existe des motifs valables de remettre en question la crédibilité d'un demandeur et que la Commission n'a pas ajouté foi aux explications fournies par le demandeur pour justifier son défaut de l'avoir fait:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Bien que la présence d'éléments de preuve corroborants ne soit pas toujours nécessaire pour établir qu'un demandeur a une crainte subjective de persécution, la Commission ne commet pas d'erreur en concluant que le défaut de corroborer une allégation au moyen d'éléments de preuve, dont on peut raisonnablement s'attendre à la production, diminue la crédibilité d'un demandeur. L'absence de documents acceptables, et d'une explication raisonnable à cet égard, ou le défaut de prendre des mesures raisonnables pour les obtenir, constitue un facteur pertinent dans l'évaluation de la crédibilité d'un demandeur:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . De plus, la présomption selon laquelle un témoignage établi sous serment est véridique peut être écartée en raison de l'absence d'éléments de preuve corroborants lorsque, comme en l'espèce, il est raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'ils soient produits:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 11-12;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  53 ACWS (3d) 158 (CAF), au paragraphe 1.
[38]
Le défendeur soutient que, compte tenu de la preuve, la Commission a, de façon raisonnable, rejeté le témoignage de M. Kina relatif aux agressions alléguées de 2006 et de 2009 et elle a conclu qu'il avait aussi tenté de présenter sa demande sous un meilleur jour. L'importance de la cohérence entre les éléments de preuve qui figurent dans un FRP et le témoignage à l'audience est reconnue, et la présence d'incohérences et d'omissions, particulièrement en ce qui concerne les éléments essentiels d'une demande, est suffisante pour entacher la crédibilité:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CFPI) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 9. Selon le défendeur, M. Kina a présenté des éléments de preuve incohérents qui visaient l'essentiel de sa demande et la SPR a, de façon raisonnable, écarté les éléments de preuve à l'égard desquels il s'était contredit. L'analyse de la Commission était axée sur les événements importants de l'exposé des demandeurs; en effet, il ne s'agissait pas d'un « examen à la loupe » de données mineures:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . C'est la Commission qui est la mieux placée pour évaluer la crédibilité d'un demandeur et en tirer les inférences qui en découlent; il faut faire preuve de déférence à l'égard de sa décision: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 4.
[39]
Enfin, le défendeur allègue que les conclusions de la Commission relatives à la protection de l'État étaient raisonnables. La Commission a commencé son analyse sur la protection de l'État en faisant un rappel du droit, et ce, en se référant à la jurisprudence pertinente, et elle a examiné avec soin la preuve documentaire relative à la situation des Roms dans la République tchèque et la République slovaque. La Commission a reconnu l'existence de problèmes comme la discrimination et la corruption toujours présentes dans les deux pays; par conséquent, elle connaissait très bien les éléments de preuve qui contredisaient sa conclusion sur la protection de l'État. La Commission a examiné et évalué les rapports négatifs, y compris ceux qui avaient été déposés par les demandeurs, mais elle n'était pas tenue de faire mention de tous les aspects dont il était question dans chacun des éléments de preuve sur la situation dans les pays en question. Il s'agit de savoir si, en examinant l'ensemble du dossier, la Commission a rendu une décision raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . De plus, l'obligation de la Commission de mentionner expressément les éléments de preuve qui contredisent ses conclusions principales, conformément aux directives données dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[40]
Selon le défendeur, le critère relatif à la protection de l'État consiste à savoir si la protection est adéquate et non si elle est parfaitement efficace:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; voir aussi
Canada (Ministre de l'Emploi et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 7. Les motifs de la Commission révèlent que cette dernière a tenu compte non seulement des
efforts
que fait la République tchèque pour lutter contre la discrimination, mais aussi de la preuve relative à la
mise en œuvre
et aux
effets
de ces efforts: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, aux paragraphes 15-18. L'argument du demandeur selon lequel la SPR n'a pas traité de la question de l'
incapacité
de l'État de protéger les demandeurs ne saurait être retenu, car la Commission a conclu sans équivoque que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État au moyen « d'éléments de preuve "clairs et convaincants" de l'
incapacité
de l'État d'assurer leur protection »: décision, au paragraphe 48, soulignement ajouté par le défendeur. La Commission mentionne les « sérieux efforts » dans le cadre de son appréciation du caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[41]
Le défendeur soutient qu'il faut faire preuve d'une grande déférence à l'égard des conclusions de la SPR relativement à la protection adéquate de l'État et que les conclusions de la Commission en l'espèce étaient raisonnables.
ANALYSE
[42]
Les motifs sur lesquels se fonde la décision ne sont pas parfaitement clairs. La Commission fait observer que les questions déterminantes concernent « la crédibilité, le temps mis avant de quitter le pays et la protection de l'État » (paragraphe 9). Cependant, ses motifs sont axés sur la crédibilité et la protection de l'État.
[43]
En ce qui a trait à M. Kina, la Commission conclut que « le témoignage du demandeur d'asile principal manquait de crédibilité » (paragraphe 26), mais on ne sait pas avoir certitude s'il s'agit d'une conclusion générale négative en matière de crédibilité. Selon le paragraphe 47, ce ne serait pas le cas étant donné que la conclusion générale relative à M. Kina est que « d'importantes parties du témoignage du demandeur d'asile principal manquent de crédibilité ». Cela donne à penser que la Commission a ajouté foi à certains éléments du témoignage de M. Kina. Donc, l'ampleur du problème de crédibilité de M. Kina demeure incertaine. Toutefois, le fondement réel de la décision en ce qui a trait à M. Kina semble le suivant:
Compte tenu du manque de crédibilité du demandeur d'asile principal et de la prépondérance de la preuve à la disposition de la Commission, [celle] -ci conclut que le demandeur d'asile principal n'a pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État.
[44]
Donc, en bout de piste, les préoccupations relatives à la crédibilité semblent être incorporées à l'analyse relative à la protection de l'État, de laquelle on peut dégager le véritable motif du rejet de la demande de M. Kina. Les rubriques des motifs nous montrent aussi que c'est bien le cas. J'en conclus que la Commission a estimé que des portions importantes du témoignage de M. Kina n'étaient pas crédibles et que, vu le lien entre certains éléments de ce témoignage et les interactions de M. Kina avec la police, ces conclusions en matière de crédibilité constituaient un aspect important de l'analyse sur la protection de l'État.
[45]
En ce qui a trait à Mme Kinova, aucune conclusion négative en matière de crédibilité n'a été tirée. Sa demande a été rejetée parce qu'elle n'a pas été en mesure de réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État (paragraphe 28). Cependant, il semble que la Commission ait conclu à l'absence de lien avec les motifs de la Convention, comme l'indique l'extrait suivant du paragraphe 47:
En outre, la Commission conclut que, même si l'épouse du demandeur d'asile principal décrit un incident survenu en 2003, elle n'a pas fourni d'éléments de preuve « clairs et convaincants » de l'incapacité de la République slovaque d'assurer sa protection. De plus, le tribunal n'a été saisi d'aucun élément de preuve convaincant établissant que cet incident était nécessairement en lien avec son ethnicité plutôt qu'un crime commis au hasard.
[46]
Cependant, ce paragraphe est suivi par le paragraphe 48, dont voici le libellé:
La Commission conclut que les demandeurs d'asile n'ont pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État au moyen d'éléments de preuve « clairs et convaincants » de l'incapacité de l'État d'assurer leur protection.
[47]
Il appert donc qu'en dernière analyse la Commission a rejeté la demande sur le fondement de l'analyse de la protection de l'État plutôt qu'en raison de problèmes de crédibilité ou de l'absence de lien avec les motifs de la Convention, même si ces deux derniers éléments ont été pris en compte dans l'analyse relative à la protection de l'État. Globalement, les motifs semblent étayer cette conclusion.
[48]
Les analyses relatives à la protection de l'État, tant pour M. Kina que Mme Kinova, sont tout à fait inadéquates et déraisonnables pour les motifs que la Cour a rappelés à de nombreuses reprises. Voir: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, aux paragraphes 69-74 (République slovaque); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée (Hongrie); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée (Hongrie); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, aux paragraphes 11-13 (Hongrie); <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, aux paragraphes 23-25 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (République tchèque);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (République tchèque);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (République tchèque);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (République slovaque);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Hongrie).
[49]
En ce qui a trait à M. Kina, dans son analyse sur la protection de l'État, comme c'est généralement le cas, la Commission reconnaît l'existence des difficultés auxquelles se heurtent les Roms en République tchèque, mais elle tente ensuite de démontrer que l'État fait des « efforts » pour résoudre ces problèmes. Il n'y a aucune analyse réelle de ce que le juge Mosley, dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a appelé le « caractère satisfaisant des efforts concrets » déployés par l'État et une partie importante de l'analyse porte sur la discrimination dans le domaine de l'éducation, qui n'a aucune pertinence quant à la conclusion relative à la crédibilité du témoignage relatif aux interactions avec la police et quant à la question de savoir si la République tchèque est disposée à protéger les demandeurs contre la violence raciste ou en mesure de le faire.
[50]
Des problèmes semblables se retrouvent dans l'analyse de la Commission relative à la protection de l'État qui concerne la République slovaque, le pays de référence pour Mme Kinova. Par exemple, le paragraphe 13 précise que « la protection offerte par la République slovaque aux victimes d'actes criminels est adéquate » parce que « la République slovaque déploie de sérieux efforts pour régler les problèmes de criminalité » et « la police est disposée à protéger les victimes et en mesure de le faire ». Ces commentaires donnent à penser que la Commission met l'accent sur les victimes de crimes en général et non sur les problèmes précis que vivent les Roms. Quoi qu'il en soit, les éléments de preuve sur lesquels s'appuie la Commission pour étayer cet énoncé (paragraphes 44-45) ont peu de pertinence en ce qui concerne les Roms ou confirment l'allégation des demandeurs selon laquelle la République slovaque n'offre pas de protection adéquate aux Roms. À titre d'exemple, voici un extrait des motifs de la Commission à ce sujet:
Des observateurs des droits de la personne ont avancé que les policiers étaient parfois réticents à accepter le témoignage de certains témoins, tout particulièrement ceux d'origine rom, des femmes et des sans-abri, et que,
bien souvent, ils n'enquêtaient pas rapidement et rigoureusement sur les cas mettant en cause des Roms et d'autres membres de groupes minoritaires
.
[Non souligné dans l'original.]
[51]
Voici les seules autres mentions du traitement réservé aux Roms dans la République slovaque qui figurent dans la décision et sur lesquelles s'appuie la Commission (au paragraphe 45):
Le gouvernement a fait des efforts pour lutter contre la violence et la discrimination à l'égard des Roms et des autres minorités, même si certains s'inquiètent du manque de formation des juges à l'égard des lois pertinentes. Le gouvernement a continué à mettre en œuvre son plan d'action contre la xénophobie et l'intolérance, qui prévoyait la création d'une unité spéciale de la police pour surveiller les activités des extrémistes. Une commission formée d'ONG, de policiers et de représentants du gouvernement a conseillé la police sur les questions liées aux minorités.
Le plénipotentiaire a maintenu cinq bureaux régionaux pour superviser la mise en œuvre des politiques gouvernementales relatives aux questions roms, appuyer le développement des infrastructures et assurer la coopération avec les municipalités et les villages, le tout dans le but d'améliorer les interactions entre les Roms et les non-Roms. Au cours de l'année, le gouvernement a mis en place un plan national de lutte contre la discrimination. Le bureau du vice-premier ministre responsable des droits de la personne a agi à titre de secrétariat du Conseil des minorités nationales et du Conseil du gouvernement pour les ONG.
[52]
En s'appuyant sur ces éléments, la Commission a conclu que « [l]es exemples susmentionnés démontrent que, dans l'ensemble, la République slovaque a déployé des efforts considérables pour offrir une meilleure protection à ses citoyens et qu'elle fait de sérieux efforts pour lutter contre la corruption » (paragraphe 46). Il n'existe aucune véritable analyse de ce que cela signifie pour les Roms et aucune analyse concernant le caractère satisfaisant de la protection offerte aux Roms contre la violence raciste dans la République slovaque par suite de ces « sérieux efforts ». La SPR n'a pas effectué une analyse raisonnable de la question de la protection de l'État.
[53]
Il incombe bien sûr aux demandeurs de réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État, mais si la Commission ne procède pas à une analyse raisonnable du caractère satisfaisant de cette protection, elle n'est pas en mesure de déterminer au vu l'ensemble de la preuve si les demandeurs ont effectivement réfuté cette présomption.
[54]
Les avocats des parties conviennent qu'il n'y a aucune question à certifier. La Cour est d'accord.
JUGEMENT
[55]
LA COUR ORDONNE
:
1. La demande est accueillie. La décision est annulée et l'affaire est renvoyée pour réexamen par un tribunal différemment constitué.
2. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]