 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 203)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Martineau, J.
February 27, 2013.
Counsel:
[None disclosed].
Solicitors of Record:
[Non disclosed].
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Martineau, J.
: The applicant has been under immigration hold since his arrest on July 22, 2011. There have been several detention reviews and numerous bondsmen have been proposed, but each detention review found the applicant to be unlikely to appear for his removal. Today, he attacks the legality of a decision rendered on January 31, 2013 by the Immigration Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [Board] ordering his continued detention, again based on the finding that he is unlikely to appear for removal.
[2]
This is an expedited judicial review caused by the fact that the present application will become moot if it is not heard or decided prior to the next detention review which is scheduled to take place before March 1, 2013. The relevant facts are not in dispute.
[3]
The applicant is a failed refugee claimant from Pakistan who is excluded from the definition of Convention refugee, based on his alleged membership in the Sipah-e-Sahaba. As far back as February 2002, the respondent has instituted proceedings to remove the applicant from Canada. The applicant was arrested in July 2011 a few days after the Canada Border Services Agency [CBSA] released his name, photograph, and last known whereabouts on its website under the heading "Wanted by the CBSA". The applicant now fears a risk that, upon return to Pakistan, he would face extreme physical abuse while in custody, unlawful detention, extrajudicial killings, and a risk from sectarian groups or vigilantes. On February 16, 2012, the Minister's delegate nevertheless rejected his most recent Pre-Removal Risk Assessment [PRRA] application, but the latter decision was set aside on December 18, 2012 and the matter was remitted back to a different Minister's delegate for redetermination:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[4]
Before the Court, the applicant asserts that the Board has failed to consider the impact of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision and to properly evaluate both the elapsed and expected length of time in detention, and has also arbitrarily rejected the proposed alternatives to detention. The respondent argues, to the contrary, that the Board considered the totality of the evidence and that, while the elapsed length of time weighed in the applicant's favour, no clear and compelling reasons justified a departure from prior decisions since the proposed alternatives to detention were not sufficient to address the valid concerns raised by the Board.
[5]
The parties agree that the applicable standard of review is that of reasonableness. Despite the able presentation of the applicant's learned and experienced counsel, I am unable to find any reviewable error on the part of the Board. While a different decision maker may have come to a different result, this is not the test, and overall, I must find that the continued detention of the applicant, until the next detention hearing, is an acceptable outcome in light of the law and the evidence on record.
[6]
The applicable law and legal principles are not in dispute in this case. It is not challenged that, in addition to the mandatory factors found in section 248 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227 [Regulations], the Board may also consider other relevant factors in balancing the competing interests of a detainee not to be unduly deprived of his freedom with the public interest in upholding the law. Indeed, the Board's responsibility is an "onerous" one since it calls for an assessment of future behaviour based on past events. Accordingly, there is rarely one correct answer to cases like this one (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). It is also accepted that in order for the Board to depart from previous decisions, "clear and compelling reasons for doing so must be set out.":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FCR 572 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[7]
I find that the Board considered all relevant factors. Here, the ground for the continued detention has not changed. While there are no reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is a danger to the public, the Board strongly believes that he is unlikely to appear for removal and that the proposed bonds persons will not be in a position to exercise influence on the applicant, despite the amounts of the bonds. Such factual determinations come within the ambit of the exclusive and specialized functions of the Board and should not be disturbed unless they are found to have been made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it. This is not the case here and it is not the function of the Court to re-weigh the evidence and various factors set out in section 248 of the Regulations.
[8]
I find the Board's reasoning well articulated and I dismiss any suggestion made by the applicant that the Board did not consider the totality of the evidence, including the new features of the proposed alternatives to detention. The Board also refers to the reasons for refusing the bonds in the past and sees no reason to come to a different conclusion. While the Board notes that it is free to take a fresh look at the case, the Board maintains that it is still concerned (1) that the proposed individuals for posting bond did not seem to have a relationship with the applicant, and (2) that the applicant had not adhered to prior CBSA proceedings, which the Board takes as an indication that he would not appear for removal. Again, this finding is reasonable in the circumstances.
[9]
On the one hand, there is evidence on record that in 1999 the applicant lied to the immigration authorities about his true identity, that he did not attend his removal interview with the CBSA in January 2003, and that he told his lawyer that he was leaving Montreal to return to Pakistan, but then instead moved from Montreal to Toronto. A warrant having been issued for his arrest in July 2003; the applicant thereafter remained in Canada illegally. The applicant retained counsel in December 2010 and his counsel scheduled an interview with the CBSA for the applicant on January 25, 2011, but again he did not appear for the interview. The Board could reasonably conclude that the applicant is someone "who has absolutely no desire, whatsoever, to appear for removal" and that his history demonstrates that he is "willing to do things, whether legal or illegal, to stay in Canada."
[10]
On the other hand, if we consider the "pull of bail", to use a criminal analogy, "the real effective force that it exerts, is that it may cause the offender to attend his trial rather than subject his nearest and dearest who has gone surety for him to undue pain and discomfort" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> citing with approval this statement made by Lord Widgery CJ in
R
v Southampton Justices
,
ex parte Corker
(1976), 120 SJ 214). In the present instance, the Board was simply not persuaded that "the trust that [the proposed bondsmen] put in [the applicant] is well founded" since "history has demonstrated that [the applicant] can't be trusted." Thus, the Board could reasonably conclude that the proposed bonds are a factor that does not sufficiently outweigh the other considerations: "[B]ecause you are someone who essentially believes that your life is on the line, I have great difficulty seeing what amount of money you would consider to be worth your life."
[11]
The applicant also focuses on the Board's alleged refusal to consider the four bondsmen that came forward, expressed their trust in the applicant, their awareness of his situation, and, notably, that they were willing to post bonds that represented significant sums of money considering their financial records. The applicant asserts that the Board did not look at all of these "changed circumstances" and did not adequately consider the influence the four individuals would have, together, over the applicant. The Board doubted their belief that the applicant would comply with the conditions imposed on him; however, the Board did not cross-examine the bondsmen. As a result, the applicant suggests that this constitutes an assumption that is not based on the evidence presented.
[12]
The Board did not say that no bonds would be acceptable but that they would have to be "quite particular" in order to alleviate the Board's concerns. The Board was not convinced that four bondsmen would collectively assert more of an influence on the applicant than simply one of them. Although another decision maker may have come to a different conclusion, I nonetheless find that it was open to the Board to find the alternatives proposed insufficient based on the past behaviour of the applicant and the fact that the bondsmen are not closely related to the applicant. The point is that an increased length of detention "does not transform an unsuitable bondsperson into a suitable one. Nor does it mitigate the assessment of the respondent's flight risk from extremely high to that of assured compliance." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 57).
[13]
The Board did not ignore the other factors mentioned in section 248 of the Regulations. In terms of the length of time the applicant had spent in detention and the anticipated future length of detention, the Board notes that a year and a half is a long time to be in detention, but finds that the length is outweighed by other relevant factors. The Board also notes in reference to a portion of the prior argumentation of the applicant's counsel, that detention is not any kind of punishment and that it is simply to ensure availability when the time comes to remove the applicant.
[14]
The length of time required for a matter to be dealt with by the Federal Court is generally a "neutral" factor. As it has been stated by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> DLR (4th) 314:
Obviously, the multiplicity or challenges increases the length of the foreign nationals' detention. However, to the extent that detainees or the Government are diligently exercising recourses under the IRPA that are reasonable in the circumstances or resorting to reasonable Charter challenges, the ensuing delays should not count against either party: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  my colleague Justice Boivin in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the decision of the Minister's delegate was judged unreasonable. The applicant suggests, on the part of the Minister's delegate, that such behaviour amounts to a lack of diligence "since the applicant is now in the same position as he was 18 months ago when he made his new PRRA application." However, Justice Boivin made no finding of bad faith against the Minister's delegate, and I have no evidence before me that the other Minister's delegate, who will be called to re-determine the matter, will have a closed mind or will simply give lip service to the Court's decision in
Mohammad
and ignore its actual content.
[16]
While the Board notes in its decision that it took four months for the Minister's delegate to make a decision the last time, the applicant also argues that the Board did not make an explicit finding on this issue. I kindly disagree with the applicant. The impugned decision was rendered orally and naturally does not have the perfection of written reasons. It must be read as a whole and in a comprehensive manner to give it effect (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Clearly, the Board found that the expected length of time of the future detention was not indefinite. The Board was not obliged to come to a precise finding in terms of the exact time that the Minister's delegate will take to make a new decision.
[17]
Therefore it is premature to suggest, at this point in time, that the other delegate will not act diligently in re-determining the matter. Should the situation change, there are remedies to force the Minister's delegate to act promptly in re-determining the matter (see
Canada (Minister of Public Safety and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (stay) and
Canada (Minister of Public Safety and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (merit), aff'g
Canada (Minister of Public Safety and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[18]
For the above reasons, the application shall be dismissed. Counsel agrees that there is no question of general importance raised in this case.
JUDGMENT
[19]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application for judicial review is dismissed and that no question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Martineau
[Traduction]: Le demandeur est détenu par les autorités de l'immigration depuis son arrestation le 22 juillet 2011. Plusieurs contrôles des motifs de détention ont été effectués et de nombreux garants ont été proposés, mais à l'issue de chaque contrôle, il a été déterminé que le demandeur se soustrairait vraisemblablement au renvoi. Aujourd'hui, le demandeur conteste la légalité de la décision rendue le 31 janvier 2013 par laquelle la Section de l'immigration de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié [la Commission] a ordonné son maintien en détention, estimant encore une fois que le demandeur se soustraira vraisemblablement au renvoi.
[2]
Il s'agit d'un contrôle judiciaire accéléré, parce que la présente demande deviendra théorique si elle n'est pas entendue ou tranchée avant le prochain contrôle des motifs de détention, fixé au 1er mars 2013. Les faits pertinents ne sont pas contestés.
[3]
Le demandeur est un demandeur d'asile débouté du Pakistan exclu de la définition de réfugié au sens de la Convention en raison de son adhésion alléguée au groupe Sipah-e-Sahaba. Le défendeur tente depuis février 2002 de faire renvoyer le demandeur du Canada. Le demandeur a été arrêté en juillet 2011, quelques jours après que l'Agence des services frontaliers du Canada [l'ASFC] eut publié le nom, la photo et la dernière adresse connue du demandeur sur son site Web à la rubrique « Personnes recherchées par l'ASFC ». Le demandeur craint maintenant d'être exposé, par son renvoi au Pakistan, au risque de subir des sévices extrêmes pendant sa détention, d'être détenu illégalement, d'être victime d'une exécution sommaire et d'être menacé par des groupes sectaires ou des justiciers. Le 16 février 2012, la déléguée du ministre a néanmoins rejeté la dernière demande d'examen des risques avant renvoi [ERAR] du demandeur, mais cette décision a été annulée le 18 décembre 2012, et l'affaire a été renvoyée à un autre délégué du ministre pour réexamen:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[4]
Devant la Cour, le demandeur affirme que la Commission a fait abstraction de l'incidence de la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et omis d'évaluer adéquatement aussi bien le temps déjà passé en détention que la durée prévue de la détention, et qu'elle a aussi rejeté arbitrairement les solutions de rechange à la détention qui avaient été proposées. Le défendeur soutient en revanche que la Commission a tenu compte de l'ensemble de la preuve et que, bien que le temps déjà passé en détention milite en faveur du demandeur, aucun motif clair et convaincant ne permet d'aller à l'encontre des décisions antérieures, étant donné que les solutions de rechange à la détention qui ont été proposées ne suffisent pas à dissiper les préoccupations légitimes exprimées par la Commission.
[5]
Les parties reconnaissent que la norme de contrôle applicable en l'espèce est celle de la décision raisonnable. Malgré l'habile présentation de la savante et expérimentée conseil du demandeur, je ne peux déceler aucune erreur susceptible de révision commise par la Commission. Un décideur différent serait peut-être parvenu à un autre résultat, mais là n'est pas le critère et, somme toute, je dois conclure que la détention continue du demandeur, jusqu'au prochain contrôle des motifs de détention, est une issue acceptable au regard du droit et de la preuve au dossier.
[6]
Le droit et les principes juridiques applicables ne sont pas en litige en l'espèce. Il n'est pas contesté que, outre les critères devant être pris en compte énumérés à l'article 248 du
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2002-227 [le Règlement], la Commission peut aussi examiner d'autres critères pertinents lorsqu'elle doit mettre en balance les intérêts opposés d'une personne sous garde, laquelle ne doit pas être indûment privée de sa liberté, et l'intérêt public, qui consiste à appliquer la loi. En fait, la Commission a une lourde responsabilité, car elle doit prévoir un comportement futur à la lumière d'événements antérieurs. Par conséquent, il existe rarement une seule réponse satisfaisante dans les cas comme celui-ci (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Selon un autre principe reconnu, pour que la Commission puisse aller à l'encontre des décisions antérieures, il faut « que des motifs clairs et convaincants soient énoncés »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 10, 247 RCF 572, et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[7]
J'estime que la Commission a tenu compte de tous les critères pertinents. Ici, les motifs de la détention continue n'ont pas changé. Bien qu'aucun motif raisonnable ne donne à penser que le demandeur représente un danger pour le public, la Commission croit fortement qu'il se soustraira vraisemblablement à son renvoi, et que les garants proposés ne seront pas en mesure d'exercer une influence sur le demandeur, malgré le montant des cautionnements. De telles conclusions de fait s'inscrivent dans les fonctions exclusives et spécialisées de la Commission et ne doivent pas être modifiées, à moins que la Commission ne les ait tirées de façon abusive ou arbitraire, sans tenir compte des éléments dont elle disposait. Ce n'est pas le cas en l'espèce, et il n'appartient pas à la Cour de soupeser à nouveau la preuve et les divers critères énoncés à l'article 248 du Règlement.
[8]
À mon avis, le raisonnement de la Commission est bien exposé, et je rejette toute suggestion formulée par le demandeur selon laquelle la Commission n'aurait pas tenu compte de la totalité de la preuve, notamment les nouvelles caractéristiques des solutions proposées en remplacement de la détention. La Commission a également renvoyé aux motifs qui justifiaient le rejet des cautionnements dans le passé et ne voyait pas pourquoi elle parviendrait à une conclusion différente. Bien que la Commission souligne qu'elle a le loisir de jeter un regard neuf sur l'affaire, elle confirme qu'elle s'inquiète encore du fait que 1) les personnes qui ont proposé de déposer un cautionnement ne semblent pas avoir de lien avec le demandeur, et 2) le demandeur n'a pas respecté les procédures antérieures de l'ASFC, ce qui laisse croire à la Commission qu'il se soustraira à son renvoi. Là encore, cette conclusion est raisonnable dans les circonstances.
[9]
D'un côté, des éléments de preuve versés au dossier révèlent que le demandeur a menti aux autorités de l'immigration à propos de sa vraie identité en 1999, qu'il ne s'est pas présenté à son entrevue avant renvoi avec l'ASFC en janvier 2003, et qu'il a déménagé de Montréal à Toronto après avoir affirmé à son avocat qu'il quittait Montréal pour rentrer au Pakistan. Un mandat d'arrestation a été lancé contre lui en juillet 2003; le demandeur est demeuré illégalement au Canada par la suite. En décembre 2010, le demandeur a retenu les services d'un conseil, qui a fixé pour le demandeur une entrevue avec l'ASFC le 25 janvier 2011. Une fois encore, le demandeur ne s'est pas présenté à l'entrevue. La Commission pouvait raisonnablement conclure que le demandeur est quelqu'un « qui n'[a] pas la moindre intention de [se] présenter pour [son] renvoi » et que ses antécédents indiquent qu'il est « prêt à poser des gestes légaux ou illégaux afin de demeurer au Canada ».
[10]
De l'autre côté, si nous tenons compte de [traduction] « l'effet du cautionnement », pour reprendre une analogie criminelle, [traduction] « la vraie force opérante qu'il exerce, c'est qu'il peut inciter le contrevenant à assister à son procès plutôt que de causer indûment douleur et gène à ses proches qui répondent de lui » (
Canada
(Procureur général) c <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 2009 ONCA 732, au paragraphe 40, citant avec approbation les propos tenus par Lord Widgery, juge en chef, dans
R c Southampton Justices
,
ex parte Corker
(1976), 120 SJ 214). En l'espèce, la Commission n'était tout simplement pas convaincue que « la confiance que [les garants proposés] placent en [le demandeur] soit bien fondée » étant donné que les « antécédents ont démontré que [le demandeur n'est] pas digne de confiance ». Ainsi, la Commission pouvait conclure raisonnablement que les cautionnements proposés étaient un facteur qui ne l'emportait pas suffisamment sur les autres considérations: « [C]omme vous vous êtes une personne qui croit essentiellement que sa vie est en jeu, j'ai beaucoup de difficulté à imaginer à quel montant d'argent vous évaluez votre vie. »
[11]
Le demandeur insiste aussi sur le refus allégué de la Commission de prendre en considération les quatre hommes qui se sont proposés comme garants et qui lui faisaient confiance, qui connaissaient sa situation et, en particulier, qui étaient prêts à déposer des cautionnements représentant d'importantes sommes d'argent, compte tenu de leur situation financière. Le demandeur affirme que la Commission n'a pas tenu compte de toutes ces nouvelles circonstances et qu'elle n'a pas examiné adéquatement l'influence que les quatre hommes, ensemble, auraient eue sur lui. La Commission a mis en doute l'opinion de ces hommes, qui croyaient que le demandeur respecterait les conditions qui lui seraient imposées, sans toutefois les contre-interroger. Le demandeur soutient donc qu'il s'agit d'une hypothèse non fondée sur les éléments de preuve présentés.
[12]
La Commission n'a pas dit qu'aucun cautionnement ne serait acceptable, mais qu'il faudrait un cautionnement « assez particulier » pour pallier à ses préoccupations. La Commission n'était pas convaincue que les quatre garants exerceraient collectivement plus d'influence sur le demandeur qu'un seul garant. Un autre décideur aurait pu parvenir à une conclusion différente, mais j'estime néanmoins qu'il était loisible à la Commission de juger que les solutions de rechange proposées étaient insuffisantes, compte tenu du comportement passé du demandeur et du fait que les garants n'étaient pas étroitement liés au demandeur. Une période de détention accrue « n'a pas pour effet de rendre appropriée une caution inappropriée. Cela n'a pas non plus pour effet de faire passer le risque que le défendeur s'enfuie du niveau extrêmement élevé à celui de la conformité certaine » ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 57).
[13]
La Commission n'a pas fait abstraction des autres critères mentionnés à l'article 248 du Règlement. En ce qui concerne le temps que le demandeur a déjà passé en détention et la durée prévue de la détention dans l'avenir, la Commission a fait remarquer qu'une année et demie représentait une longue période de détention, mais que d'autres critères pertinents l'emportaient sur cette durée. Se reportant à une partie des arguments antérieurs présentés par la conseil du demandeur, la Commission a aussi souligné que la détention ne constituait aucunement une punition, son but étant simplement de faire en sorte que le demandeur soit disponible lorsque viendra le temps de son renvoi.
[14]
Le temps qu'il faut à la Cour fédérale pour trancher une affaire est généralement un critère « neutre ». La Cour d'appel fédérale s'est exprimée ainsi, dans
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> DLR (4th) 314:
De toute évidence, la multiplication des contestations augmente d'autant la durée de la détention du ressortissant étranger. Toutefois, dans la mesure où le détenu ou le gouvernement exerce diligemment les recours ouverts par la LIPR qui sont raisonnables dans les circonstances ou recourt aux contestations raisonnables permises par la Charte, on ne devrait pas reprocher au gouvernement ou au détenu les délais qui s'ensuivent (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  décembre 2012 par mon collègue le juge Boivin dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , où la décision de la déléguée du ministre a été jugée déraisonnable. Le demandeur affirme qu'un tel comportement, de la part de la déléguée du ministre, équivaut à un manque de diligence, puisqu'il se trouve aujourd'hui dans la même position qu'il y a 18 mois, au moment où il a fait sa demande d'ERAR. Toutefois, le juge Boivin n'a pas conclu à la mauvaise foi de la déléguée du ministre, et rien ne m'indique que l'autre délégué du ministre qui sera appelé à réexaminer l'affaire fera preuve de fermeture d'esprit, ou encore qu'il se contentera de manifester un intérêt de pure forme pour la décision rendue par la Cour dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> tout en faisant fi de son contenu réel.
[16]
Bien que la Commission mentionne dans sa décision qu'il a fallu quatre mois à la déléguée du ministre pour rendre une décision la dernière fois, le demandeur soutient aussi que la Commission n'a pas tiré de conclusion explicite sur la question. Je ne suis pas d'accord avec le demandeur. La décision attaquée a été rendue de vive voix et n'a naturellement pas le même degré d'achèvement que des motifs écrits. Il faut la considérer dans son ensemble et de manière exhaustive pour lui donner effet (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). De toute évidence, la Commission a estimé que la durée prévue de la détention future n'était pas indéfinie. La Commission n'avait pas obligation de déterminer avec précision le temps exact que le délégué du ministre prendra pour rendre une nouvelle décision.
[17]
Il est donc prématuré d'avancer, à ce moment-ci, que l'autre délégué du ministre ne réexaminera pas l'affaire avec diligence. Si la situation changeait, des mesures correctives pourraient forcer le délégué du ministre à réexaminer promptement l'affaire (voir
Canada (Ministre de la Sécurité publique et de la Protection civile) c Lebon
, 2013 CAF 18 (sursis) et
Canada (Ministre de la Sécurité publique et de la Protection civile) c Lebon
, 2013 CAF 255 (mérite), confirmant
Canada (Ministre de la Sécurité publique et de la Protection civile) c Lebon
, 2012 CF 1500).
[18]
Pour les motifs exposés ci-dessus, la demande sera rejetée. La conseil convient que l'affaire ne soulève aucune question de portée générale.
JUGEMENT
[19]
LA COUR ORDONNE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire soit rejetée. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]