 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Montres Rolex S.A. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  David Pahmer, on behalf of themselves and on behalf of all others selling, offering for sale, importing, advertising, manufacturing or distributing any wares in association with the name Rolex or the Crown Design, being registered trademarks No. 278,348 No. 208,437, No. 130/33476 and No. 78/19056 under the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, as amended, when the same are not of the plaintiffs' manufacture or merchandise 
 
 (No. T-2355-86) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Montres Rolex S.A. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 Summary: 
 
 Herson sold a counterfeit Rolex watch notwithstanding a court order prohibiting him from that and other conduct. Herson was charged with contempt. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, found Herson in contempt and fined him $2,000.00 or 30 days' incarceration for default of payment. 
 
 
 
 Contempt - Topic 3315 
 
 Punishment - Fines - Herson sold a counterfeit Rolex watch notwithstanding a court order prohibiting him from that and other conduct - Herson was charged with contempt - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, found Herson in contempt and fined him $2,000.00 or 30 days' incarceration for default of payment. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 S. Schneiderman, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Martin Herson, on his own behalf. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Miller, Mills and Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Holden, Murdoch and Finlay, Toronto, Ontario, for the defendants, D.C. Redman and D. Pahmer. 
 
 
 
 This case was heard on April 2, 1987, at Toronto, Ontario, before Rouleau, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment orally on April 2, 1987. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Rouleau, J. [orally] 
 : This matter involves Montres Rolex S.A. and Rolex Watch Company of Canada Limited as plaintiffs and Martin Herson and others as defendants, and this particular application was an application for contempt of court proceedings and the party charged with contempt is the defendant Martin Herson. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  I have reviewed the order issued in this matter by the Associate Chief Justice and dated November the 3rd, 1986, and I am satisfied as to its clarity. I'm also convinced that the language was such that any layman could easily interpret its meaning and direction. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Mr. Herson was served personally with the order on the 15th day of November, 1986, and there's ample evidence to substantiate its proper service. There's the affidavit of the process server that was duly sworn and filed with the court, as well as Mr. Herson himself admitted receiving a copy of the order. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The pertinent facts of the order which were to affect Mr. Herson were that he was to be restrained from directly or indirectly infringing certain registered trademarks. He was also restrained from directly or indirectly using the name  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  or "Crown design" on or in connection with watches or other wares not of the plaintiff's manufacture or merchandise. He was further ordered and restrained from directly or indirectly selling, offering or advertising for sale, or importing or procuring to be sold, or manufacturing or distributing any wares under the name  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  or the "Crown design" if the same were not of the plaintiff's manufacture or merchandise, or any other name which by reason of current limitation of the word  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  or the "Crown design" or otherwise is calculated to represent or lead to believe that such wares are the wares of the plaintiff if the same are not of the plaintiff's manufacture or merchandise. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  He is also restrained from directly or indirectly in any manner aforesaid or in any manner passing off or assisting others to pass off any such wares as aforesaid and for the goods of the plaintiff. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The defendant, Martin Herson, was compelled to inform the plaintiff's solicitors as to the identity and whereabouts of his sources of supply of all the infringing watches and material referred to in the order dated November the 3rd, 1986. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Having personal knowledge of the order, Mr. Herson was also in communication with one Shelly Michaels, a co-defendant, and a person with whom he admits having some type of relationship during this period of time. She swore in this court that she had been served with a copy of the order dated November 3rd, 1986, one similar to the one served on Mr. Herson, and as a result had signed an undertaking to refrain from selling the watches and delivered those in her possession to the plaintiff's solicitor. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  She further testified that she advised Mr. Herson in person, in November of 1986, of the circumstances surrounding her encounter with the court, and advised him that she would no longer sell any counterfeit Rolex watches. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  There was filed in the court the affidavit of Stephen Ferriss, the private investigator employed by the plaintiff, who swore that he purchased a Rolex watch from Mr. Herson on December the 11th, 1986. The gentleman charged with contempt admitted this to be true. He also confirmed that it was a counterfeit watch, and to further substantiate this fact there was also filed with the court the affidavit of Harold George Monckton, a vice-president of Rolex Watch Company of Canada Limited, who examined the watch that had been purchased and found it to be a counterfeit. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  There was evidence before me that the sale of counterfeit Rolex watches erodes the integrity of this widely known, highly respected and much sought after prestige product, and I find as a fact that the sale of counterfeit Rolex watches affects the confidence of the purchasing public and creates a feeling of mistrust within the consuming public. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Mr. Herson testified in his own behalf in answering the charge of contempt and suggested that he was not aware of the seriousness of the order served upon him and felt that his actions were not blatant disregard. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  He further gave evidence that he thought he had 30 days in which to either respond or refrain from continuing this activity. I do not accept this evidence and I reject it in its entirety. I am satisfied that he could easily comprehend the order served on him November 15th, 1986, and that he had to be aware that his course of conduct was completely indecent. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  I further accept the evidence of Miss Michaels that she told him she had undertaken to no longer sell counterfeit Rolex watches and that she had given her written undertaking not to do so; that this conversation occurred after Mr. Herson had been served and before the transaction of December the 11th, 1986 took place. I am satisfied that this conversation alone should have made Mr. Herson more apprehensive and he should have immediately obeyed the court order as directed. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Upon hearing the evidence and a reading of the affidavits filed, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has met the test of establishing a prima facie case and that the defendant has failed to create any doubt in my mind, let alone displace the allegations, and I therefore make a finding that Mr. Herson is in contempt of the order dated November the 3rd, 1986 and in contempt of this court. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  The plaintiff, by way of remedy, seeks a fine of $5,000.00 and, in the alternative or non-payment, 10 days in jail. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Mr. Herson admitted being observed selling counterfeit Rolex watches and the law is quite clear that when an order is given against an individual or a corporation, it is the responsibility of that individual to ensure that the order is complied with. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  It is also equally clear that a breach must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, and to my satisfaction there is no doubt that this matter has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Court orders must be obeyed in their spirit as well as to the letter of the law. The contempt powers given the court are to ensure smooth functioning of the judicial process and to advise the public at large that disobedience of a court pronouncement brings about swift and just retribution. It must be remembered that the primary purpose of imposing sanctions is to ensure compliance with orders of the court, and as I said in the Manitoba Teachers case, nothing should be allowed to interfere with the good order and administration of justice, or impair the dignity of the court. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  In considering the amount of the fine it was pointed out to me that a similar defendant, a Mr. Balshin, had imposed upon him for contempt a nominal amount of $1,000.00. I have reviewed the statement of claim and I have discovered that obviously Mr. Balshin was no amateur, and certainly Mr. Herson is no amateur in this field. He has had years of experience, he tells us he earned his living selling jewellery, so there's no doubt in my mind that he knew that what he was selling was counterfeit. This is total and blatant disregard. He knew of the undertaking and the difficulties that Miss Michaels had encountered and he still continued to disregard the orders of this court. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  Mr. Herson, please stand up. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  You know, having the knowledge that you have of the jewellery business, this is absolute blatant disregard for commerce, for people who have spent thousands of dollars to develop products, to advertise them, it's disgraceful. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  I'm going to fine you $2,000.00 and it's to be paid by the 31st of May, and if you don't pay it the alternative is 30 days in the County Jail. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: My Lord, may I address the issue of costs? 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: Costs to the applicant after taxation. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: May I ask for costs on a solicitor and client basis, for this reason. The distinction between Mr. Herson and Mr. Balshin is this. Mr. Balshin didn't come to court and pretend to the court. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: He wrote a letter even. He wrote a letter of apology that's in the file. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: Exactly. And he didn't compel Rolex to go through the exercise of subpoenaing half a dozen witnesses, producing witnesses and so on. Mr. Herson, as is his right, compelled a hearing. But as is the equal right of the applicant or the plaintiffs, I'm asking this court that in the circumstances and in view of Your Lordship's finding of contempt, that he be ordered to pay costs on a solicitor and client basis, because this, with respect, is not a party and party situation. It is something more serious, more flagrant than that. And those are my submissions. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: Well, this is a serious matter and the court does have discretion, under the new rules, with respect to costs. I will fix your costs, rather than have you tax them. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: Very well, My Lord. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: You shall be allowed all of your disbursements. 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: Counsel fee? 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: And preparation fee of all affidavits and subpoenas and other documents required in this matter. I'll set the fee at $400.00, and for appearing today on this matter, $350.00. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: Will there be a time within which Mr. Herson--? 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: He shall pay the costs as well by May 31st of 1987. 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: Should we deliver to Mr. Herson a list of our disbursements? 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  HIS LORDSHIP: Yes, I think you should serve him. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  MR. SCHNEIDERMAN: Very well, we'll do that. 
 
 
 
 Order accordingly. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



