[1] Reed, J.
: Three motions are brought for summary judgment: one by the plaintiff and two by the defendants.
[2]
The plaintiff seeks summary judgment with respect to a debt of $185,292 which the plaintiff states the defendant, Sam Blyth, admitted in a letter of March 17, 1993 was owing to the plaintiff. The defendants bring a motion to have summary judgment issued dismissing the action as against 381383 Ontario Limited, on the ground that the pleadings do not allege material facts sufficient to establish any cause of action against that company. The defendants also seek summary judgment dismissing the action as against Sam Blyth on the ground that, at all times, he was acting as an officer of Blyth and Company Travel Limited ("BCTL") and not in his personal capacity.
[3]
Insofar as the defendant's motion relating to 381383 Ontario Limited is concerned, no real dispute exists. Before any oral argument was made, counsel for the plaintiff indicated that she would be voluntarily amending the Statement of Claim to delete all reference to 381383 Ontario Limited. With respect to the costs of this motion, I have not been persuaded that a fixed amount should be awarded to the defendants in any event of the cause. Costs will be awarded to follow the cause.
[4]
With respect to the defendant's motion to have the action dismissed as against Sam Blyth, an affidavit was filed by him stating that he was at all times acting only as an officer of BCTL. However, Mr. Newman, an officer of the plaintiff who dealt with Mr. Blyth, states that, at all times, it was Mr. Blyth personally with whom he dealt and Mr. Blyth did not indicate that he was acting only on behalf of BCTL. In addition, correspondence from Mr. Blyth to the plaintiff was signed by Mr. Blyth personally. Mr. Blyth did not sign the correspondence in the name of a corporate entity or in the name of a limited company. The correspondence was signed on the letterhead of Blyth & Company Travel. The plaintiff was quite entitled to assume that this referred to Mr. Blyth personally as well as to his company BCTL. Equally, the relevant joint venture agreement, between the plaintiff and the defendants, was signed by Mr. Blyth on behalf of Blyth & Company Travel. There was no indication that Blyth & Company Travel was the corporate entity Blyth & Company Travel Limited and that it alone was accepting responsibility, independent and apart from Mr. Blyth, for the transactions in question. The evidence does not support the issuance of a summary judgment dismissing the plaintiff's claim as against Mr. Blyth.
[5]
I turn then to the plaintiff's motion for a summary judgment for $185,292, which the defendants have admitted is owed to the plaintiff. Sections 432.1 to 432.6 of the
Federal Court Rules
are new. The provide:
"432.1(1) A plaintiff may, after the defendant has filed a defence, or earlier with leave of the court, and at any time prior to the fixing of the time and date for trial, make a motion to a judge, with supporting affidavit material or other evidence, for summary judgment on all or part of the claim in the statement of claim.
. . . . .
"432.2(1) In response to affidavit material or other evidence supporting a motion for summary judgment, a responding party may not rest on the mere allegations or denials of the party's pleadings, but must set out, in affidavit material or other evidence, specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.
. . . . .
"432.3(1) Where a judge is satisfied that there is no genuine issue for trial with respect to a claim or defence, the judge shall grant summary judgment accordingly.
"(2) Where a judge is satisfied that the only genuine issue is the amount to which the moving party is entitled, the judge may order a trial of that issue or grant summary judgment with a reference to determine the amount.
"(3) Where a judge is satisfied that the only genuine issue is a question of law, the judge may determine the question and grant summary judgment accordingly.
"(4) Where a judge decides that there is a genuine issue with respect to a claim or defence, the judge may nevertheless grant summary judgment in favour of any party, either upon an issue or generally, unless
(a) the judge is unable on the whole of the evidence to find the facts necessary to decide the questions of fact or law; or
(b) the judge considers that it would be unjust to decide the issues on the motion for summary judgment.
. . . . .
"432.5 Where summary judgment is refused or is granted only in part, the judge may make an order specifying what material facts are not in dispute and defining the issues to be tried, any may give such directions or impose such terms as the judge deems just, including an order
(a) for payment into court of all or part of the claim;
(b) for security for costs; and
(c) limiting the nature and scope of discovery, if any, to matters not covered by the affidavits filed on the motion for summary judgment and any cross-examination on them, and providing for the use of the affidavits and cross-examination at the trial in the same manner as an examination for discovery."
"432.6 Where it appears that the enforcement of a summary judgment ought to be stayed pending the determination of any other issue in the action or a counterclaim, cross-demand or third party claim, a judge may so order on such terms as the judge deems just."
[6]
The dispute which underlies the present litigation is a joint venture arrangement between the plaintiff and the defendants. The plaintiff is a Crown corporation which owns and operates the M.V. "Northern Ranger". Mr. Blyth is the principle shareholder and officer of BCTL and 381383 Ontario Limited. BCTL is a retail travel company which sells tour packages directly to institutions, including educational institutions and the public. Mr. Blyth is a travel consultant who operates the business called Blyth & Company Travel. The plaintiff and the defendants entered into a joint venture whereby the "Northern Ranger", was to be used to provide a series of environmentally oriented cruise expeditions. These excursions were to go to the Galapagos Islands and the Antarctic.
[7]
The initial expedition encountered difficulties. For example, the vessel ran into a hurricane shortly after leaving Newfoundland. This left it with structural damages which had to be repaired and this caused delay. Shortly after leaving Bermuda, the roof of the wheelhouse collapsed, thus necessitating repairs which allegedly created further delay. The refrigeration and air conditioning systems were also damaged and may not in any event have been sufficient for tropical climes. As a result of a number of factors, changes in the itinerary became necessary. One consequence of these changes was that the Galapagos Islands were not visited on the southward voyage, as had originally been planned. The defendants say this occurred because the plaintiff did not obtain the requisite docking permits (its responsibility). The plaintiff says this occurred because the defendants did not obtain the requisite landing permits for visiting the Galapagos (the defendants' responsibility). The plaintiff also asserts that Mr. Blyth made promises and commitments to the passengers which compounded the difficulties.
[8]
The joint venture arrangement was such that the defendants organized and sold the tour packages to the customers and obtained the revenues which arose from those sales. These were to be paid into a joint venture account from which the plaintiff and defendants would be paid for the respective items of expense which each incurred. The joint venture involved a series of excursions during the months of December, 1992 through April, 1993. The defendants did not deposit the revenue into the joint venture account, as required by the agreement. The last such payment was made by them on February 17, 1993. This gave rise to various discussions and eventually a letter dated March 17, 1993 sent by Mr. Blyth to the plaintiff. The motion for summary judgment is based on that letter. The letter reads:
"During the last two days I have reached an agreement with your accounting staff on both the client revenues and the disbursements from the joint venture account with the help of Don Newman. These represent the majority of monies owed by Blyth & Company Travel to the joint venture having completed ten of the twelve cruises of the project.
"The revenues from the last three cruises totalled $322,500 and the amount owing Marine Atlantic is $172,083. In addition $13,209 is owed to Marine Atlantic for food purchased on behalf of Blyth & Company Travel.
"The project as a whole has had a devastated impact on the financial health of Blyth Company Travel. Our losses are far greater than we anticipated and the bad publicity we received has made trading conditions difficult, as well. As a result I will have draw on resources outside of this company in order to settle accounts with Marine Atlantic.
"This morning I called on my bankers to arrange a second mortgage on our large French real estate holdings and while this is proceeding it will take some time to put in place. Our property, which has an appraised value of about $20,000,000 and equity about $8-10,000,000 is a very significant asset and will certainly ensure that you get paid. I have instructed my bankers to arrange this with the greatest of speed and expect them to complete it, shortly. I am not in a position to pay Marine Atlantic otherwise. As soon as we have funding I will ensure that you are paid.
"There are revenues still due for the northbound positioning cruise which we will deposit directly to the joint venture. These include revenues for the Galapagos Islands and substantial ship board revenues which are still on the ship.
"In valuating the project I hope that you are able to see some very substantial successes as well as the obvious tribulations. We have a large and very happy group of customers who thoroughly enjoyed the Antarctic trips, we have received a good deal of very positive editorial and mail and we filled substantially all of the space in the Antarctic. Certainly, if the ship had not started into a hurricane on leaving St. John's it would have allowed us to get off to a better start and I think the whole project would have proceeded smoothly from start to finish.
"I am sure that you will concur that while we have had financial challenges in this project it has gone smoothly from an operational point of view. You have my assurance that we will make good on the financial end."
[9]
Counsel for the defendants argues that the March 17, 1993 letter, although not marked as being sent "without prejudice", was in fact either a settlement letter and/or sent in contemplation of litigation and therefore is not admissible evidence. There is no doubt that prior to the time the letter was sent, discussions were ongoing between the plaintiff and the defendants with respect to who would bear responsibility and in what amount for compensation which was being paid to passengers as a result of the difficulties which the voyage had encountered. The plaintiff, at one point, had agreed to pay a share, subject to proper documentation being provided by the defendants with respect to the claims and the amount paid or to be paid. While discussions of the compensation to be paid to passengers and of the amount owed to the plaintiff out of the joint venture account were occurring simultaneously, they were independent.
[10]
A review of the March 17, 1993 letter in the context in which it was written does not support a conclusion that it was written as either a settlement offer or in contemplation of litigation. The defendants sent the letter acknowledging how much was owed to the plaintiff, from the joint account, and stating that it would be paid. This was not expressed to be tied to any resolution the parties might make with respect to passenger compensation. It was not conditional or qualified in any way. In addition, the tone of the letter was not acrimonious nor did it place any blame on the plaintiff for the difficulties which had been encountered. The letter was sent after the plaintiff had expressly pointed out that the amounts owed to it out of the joint venture account and what might be paid to passengers as compensation for earlier difficulties were two separate issues.
[11]
Counsel for the defendants argues that the commitment to pay the $185,292 was conditional on the defendants being able to obtain financing from real estate owned in France. It is stated that when this condition could not be met, the obligation to pay the $185,292 was terminated. I do not read the commitment to pay in this way. The defendants explained how they expected to be able to pay, but the admission with respect to the amount owing was not conditional thereon.
[12]
Counsel argues that summary judgment should not issue because the defendants' claim against the plaintiff is in the nature of an equitable set-off. It is argued that the evidence of opposing claims for damages in respect of financial losses arising out of the same transaction is sufficient evidence to raise an issue of equitable set-off. (One definition of an equitable set-off which appears in the cases is:
"a relationship between the respective claims of the parties which is such that the claim of the defendant has been brought about by, or has been contributed to by, or is otherwise
closely bound up with
, the rights that are relied on by the plaintiff
and
which
is such that it would be inconceivable that he should proceed without permitting a set-off.
"
(underlining added)
(quotation from Spry,
Principles of Equitable Remedies
(3rd Ed. 1984), at p. 175 quoted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  prevents the issuing of summary judgment. Decisions under the Ontario Rules of Practice (now the Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure) were cited in support of the contention that the existence of a triable issue of equitable set-off will render summary judgment inappropriate:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. Master). As well as the above cases, the following were cited in which it was found that no set-off existed sufficient to prevent the issuing of a summary judgment:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. Gen. Div.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.).
[13]
These cases distinguish between a defence of equitable set-off and a counterclaim. In the latter summary judgment will issue, while in the former it will not. The cases illustrate the difficulty that exists in trying to determine whether a defendant's claim is more properly characterized as an equitable set-off or a counterclaim.
[14]
It is not clear to me that the new rules of this court (432.1 and following) are to be interpreted in the same fashion as the Ontario Rules. The definition of equitable set-off was developed in the equity courts for the purpose of ensuring that judgment would not issue on a claim when a closely linked claim of the opposing party existed. The purpose was to ensure that all related claims would be decided at the same time in order to avoid inequitable results. The rules respecting what constitutes an equitable set-off were not developed for the purpose of interpreting rules authorizing a court to issue summary judgment with respect to part of a case, nor in the context of a court having authority to order a stay of the execution of any such summary judgment until all issues in the case are decided. I am not convinced that a distinction must be made between set-offs and counterclaims for the sake of deciding whether summary judgment on part of a claim can issue pursuant to Rule 432.3.
[15]
In my view, Rules 432.1 and following should be interpreted by reference to their own textual framework. Rule 432.3(4) provides that summary judgment should not be granted on an issue which (1) on the whole of the evidence the judge cannot find the necessary facts or (2) it would be unjust to do so. These are the criteria which must be considered, not an analysis of whether or not a claim is characterized as an equitable set-off.
[16]
Counsel for the defendants argues that summary judgment should not be issued because there is a dispute as to the proper defendant. The plaintiff named Sam Blyth, carrying on business as "Blyth & Company Travel" as a defendant. It also named Blyth & Company Travel Limited. This last is an Ontario incorporated company, of which, as noted, Sam Blyth is the principal shareholder and officer. Also, as noted above, the joint venture agreement and the correspondence sent to the plaintiff by Mr. Blyth was signed by Mr. Blyth personally and was sent under the letterhead of "Blyth & Company Travel". Mr. Blyth in his affidavit states that he was acting on behalf of Blyth & Company Travel Limited when he dealt with the plaintiff. He asserts that the passenger compensation which was paid, and for which he seeks a contribution from the plaintiff, was consequent upon claims being made in the Ontario courts against BCTL and 381383 Ontario Limited. On the basis of all this evidence, I do not think that the defendants can resist the issuing of a summary judgment by arguing that a credible dispute exists as to whether the proper defendants have been named. In my view, the evidence establishes that Sam Blyth and BCTL were jointly acting under the rubric Blyth and Company Travel.
[17]
Counsel for the plaintiff does not dispute that if summary judgment, with respect to the $185,292, is entered, it would be appropriate to stay the execution of that judgment pending resolution of the other issues which are in dispute. Thus, even with the entry of summary judgment, the final calculation of "who owes what to whom" would only be determined after all disputed issues had been decided.
[18]
The difficulty I have, however, is severing the claim on which summary judgment is sought from other claims in the Statement of Claim. The relevant parts of the Statement of Claim read:
"11) In contravention of its responsibilities under the Joint Venture Agreement, the defendant, Sam Blyth, ceased making payments into the Joint Venture Account with the last payment on 17 February 1993, for the 'per trip revenues' received from customers. These payments as per documentation supplied to the defendant should have totalled $1,205,550 by the end of the venture. The defendant's payments totalled only $676,597.50, for a shortfall of $528,952.50.
"12) In addition, the defendant, Sam Blyth, has failed to pay shipboard revenues (bar, gift shop and other shipboard concessions) and service charge revenues into the Joint Venture Account contrary to the Joint Venture Agreement. These payments, as per documentation supplied to the defendant Sam Blyth, should have totalled $158,000.
"13) By letter dated 17 March, the defendant promised to pay at that point in time the sum of $185,000, plus the income revenues for the remaining trips and from the shipboard sales, to the plaintiff. The defendant has not honoured this commitment, in spite of the fact that the defendant received from each customer amounts that were significantly in excess of the 'per diem revenues' that were to go into the Joint Venture Account. The defendant was advised that the net amount owing to the Plaintiff as a result of the Joint Venture Agreement for the whole venture exceeds $800,000. This sum represents the net effect of the revenue flows and of the fifty percent share of the loss of the Joint Venture as agreed in the Joint Venture Agreement.
. . . . .
"15) The plaintiff further claims that the defendant, Sam Blyth, failed to provide an appropriate level of medical representation that was his responsibility under the Joint Venture Agreement, and that such failure represents a breach of the Joint Venture Agreement, for which breach the plaintiff claims damages.
"16) The plaintiff further claims that the defendant, Sam Blyth, has not supplied reservation and detailed customer-by-customer information on shipboard sales to the plaintiff as promised and that such failure constitutes a breach of an implied term of the Joint Venture Agreement.
"17) The plaintiff further claims that the defendant, Sam Blyth, failed to properly market the joint venture cruises, as was the defendant's responsibility under the Joint Venture Agreement, including the return cruises in the Chilean fjords, along the coast of South America, and to the Galapagos Islands, resulting in substantial losses to the plaintiff due to revenue shortfalls.
. . . . .
"19) The plaintiff further claims against the defendant, Sam Blyth, for the provision of fallacious reservation bookings to the plaintiff. The plaintiff's reliance upon these false bookings led the plaintiff to proceed with the Joint Venture Agreement and as a result suffer substantial damages as the projected revenue was short by approximately $500,000.
"20) The plaintiff further claims against the defendant, Sam Blyth, for excessive administrative costs for the Joint Venture Agreement because of the defendant's continual refusal to honour his obligations under the Joint Venture Agreement in a timely and efficient manner resulting in additional management time and travel costs for the plaintiff to collect monies owing under the Joint Venture Agreement.
"21) The plaintiff further claims that the defendant, Sam Blyth, ignored the advice of the plaintiff's staff that two ports of call to Punta Arenas should not be made and failed to advise his staff on board of this fact. This resulted in extra costs to the joint venture of approximately $30,000.
"22) The plaintiff therefore claims against the defendant, Sam Blyth, and each of the defendants to the extent any or all of them are found responsible for obligations of 'Blyth & Company Travel' under the Joint Venture Agreement, for the following relief:
a) damages for breaches of the Joint Venture Agreement as specified in the foregoing paragraphs;
b) damages for negligent misrepresentation;
c) interest on any judgment awarded;
d) its costs of this action;
e) such further and other relief as this Honourable Court may deem necessary and proper."
[19]
The plaintiff's motion asks for judgment for $185,000 "reserving the right to pursue the balance of the plaintiff's claim at trial". While many of the additional claims may be independent and separate from the claim for $185,000, this cannot be said of all of them. As I read paras. 11, 12 and 13, for example, those paragraphs put in issue the level of revenues which should have been paid into the joint venture, account including those that went into the calculation of the $185,000. Thus, the motion before me seeks to have judgment for $185,000 but at the same time reserves the right to continue to dispute the basis of the calculation of that amount. I do not think I can conclude that there is no genuine dispute with respect to the particular claim. Thus, this is not an appropriate situation in which to give summary judgement. It may be that the motion for summary judgment could have been more narrowly and precisely framed so as to truly remove from the litigation a disputed issue but it was not.
[20]
For the reasons given, the application will be dismissed.
Applications dismissed.
Editor: Donna E. Mitchell/saf
[End of document]