 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Manuel Alejandro Osorio Diaz, Carolina Rodriguez Gutierrez and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 373)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Brown, J.
March 24, 2015.
Counsel:
Leigh Salsberg and Rosemary Gallo, for the applicants;
Judy Michaely, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Leigh Salsberg and  Rosemary Gallo, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Brown, J.
: This is an application for judicial review by Manuel Alejandro Osorio Diaz, Carolina Rodriguez Gutierrez and Alejandro Alfonso Osorio Rodriguez [the Applicants] under subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [the IRPA] of a decision by an Immigration Officer [the Officer], dated September 27, 2013, wherein the Officer refused the Applicants' application for permanent residence in Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds [H&C]. In my opinion it should be dismissed for the following reasons.
I.
Facts
[2]
Manuel Alejandro Osorio Diaz was born on March 20, 1979. His wife, Carolina Rodriguez Gutierrez, was born on August 21, 1978. Their son, Alejandro Alfonso Osorio Rodriguez, was born on October 6, 2004. The Applicants are all citizens of Mexico.
[3]
The Applicants entered Canada as temporary residents on April 27, 2008 (the father) and in August 2008 (the mother and the son). They claimed refugee protection on September 30, 2008, and a departure order was issued on the same date. The Immigration and Refugee Board, Refugee Protection Division [RPD] rejected their refugee protection claims on September 30, 2009. The Applicants sought leave for judicial review of the negative decision by the RPD, but were denied leave by this Court on February 1, 2010. Their Pre-Removal Risk Assessment application was rejected on December 16, 2010. A warrant for their arrest and removal was issued on February 24, 2011 because they failed to report to Canada Border Services Agency [CBSA], as directed, for a pre-removal interview on January 20, 2011.
[4]
They applied for permanent residence in Canada on H&C grounds on June 14, 2012. The Officer refused their application on September 27, 2013. The Applicants applied for leave to apply for judicial review of the Officer's decision which was granted December 19, 2014.
II.
Decision under Review
[5]
The Officer first summarized the Applicants' arguments, summarizing the facts of the case in some detail under the heading of the form used, namely "Factors for Consideration". The arguments relating to both "Establishment in Canada", and "Best Interest of the Child" are summarized separately on the form. The Applicants do not argue that either of these two summaries is inadequate. The Officer summarized the facts relating to "Risk and adverse country conditions" under a separate heading on the form, which findings are not challenged on this application.
[6]
The Officer then set out the analysis and reasons in the next heading on the form entitled "Decision and Reasons". The Officer correctly noted that the Applicants bore the onus of satisfying the decision-maker that their personal circumstances are such that the hardship of having to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada in the normal manner would be 1) unusual and undeserved; or 2) disproportionate. The Officer also noted the immigration procedural history of the Applicants in Canada including the fact that a warrant for their removal was active at the time of this H&C decision.
A.
Establishment in Canada
[7]
The Officer acknowledged that the Applicants have developed relationships with friends and members of their community since their arrival in Canada, but found that the severing of these new relationships would not cause hardship which would justify an exemption for the legislative requirement to apply for immigrant visa from abroad. The Officer noted that all of the Applicants' family members and former friends and colleagues still reside in Mexico and reasonably may be expected to offer support to the Applicants upon their return to Mexico. The Officer found that even if the Applicants might experience some difficulties in readjusting upon return to Mexico, such adjustment did not constitute hardship that is unusual and underserved or disproportionate and would not warrant a positive exemption under H&C considerations.
[8]
The Officer acknowledged the Applicants' steady employment, their study of the English language, improvement of their skills, good civil record, community involvement, volunteer efforts, and support among their friends and community in Canada, helped the Applicants' social and economic integration in Canada. The Officer found that the Applicants took positive steps in establishing themselves in Canada, but found their integration and establishment to be as expected and not exceptional. The Officer consequently found that the Applicants' establishment in Canada did not justify an exemption under H&C considerations. The Officer further noted that he had been presented with insufficient evidence to indicate that the Applicants' establishment was as a result of circumstances beyond their control or a prolonged inability to leave Canada, such that it would cause them unusual or disproportionate hardship to apply from outside Canada.
B.
Best Interest of the Child (or BIOC)
[9]
The Officer acknowledged that the minor Applicant, after removal, will be in an environment with different socioeconomic conditions, but found that this situation was not "an exceptional situation" or that it was "an unusual circumstance to justify a positive exemption". The Officer found that, as the minor Applicant is quite young and is still learning customs and culture in Canada, moving to Mexico at this time and having the chance to develop relationships with extended family members would not be detrimental to his development and would not be considered unusual and underserved or disproportionate hardship. The Officer acknowledged that Mexico may not have the same living standard as Canada and is experiencing high degree of violence in some areas, but found that these factors would not "have a direct adverse impact" on the minor Applicant. The Officer considered:
the best interests of [the child] along with the personal circumstances of this family, and find that the applicants have not established that the general consequence of relocating and resettling back to their home country would have a significant negative impact on him. I have carefully examined the best interest of [the child], and having regard to his circumstances, it is my finding that they do not justify and exemption under humanitarian and compassionate considerations.
C.
Risk and Adverse Country Conditions
[10]
Regarding the Applicants' allegations that there is widespread levels of discrimination against women and that Mrs. Rodriguez in particular would face hardship upon returning to Mexico, the Officer noted that the Applicants had not detailed or documented Mrs. Rodriguez's personal history of discrimination in Mexico to allow him to assess the extent that she had been personally or directly impacted. The Officer was consequently not satisfied that having to return to Mexico would result in hardship for Mrs. Rodriguez that is unusual and undeserved or disproportionate as a result of gender-based discrimination.
[11]
Regarding the level of violence and crime, as well as unfavourable economic conditions the Applicants would face upon returning to Mexico, the Officer found that such conditions are generally faced by the population. The Officer further found that Applicants had failed to establish by means of the evidence that the hardships associated with general country conditions amounted to unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship.
III.
Issues
[12]
This matter raises the following issues:
(1) Whether the Officer erred in assessing the Applicants' degree of establishment in Canada?
(2) Whether the Officer erred in assessing the best interest of the child?
IV.
Standard of Review
[13]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], the Supreme Court of Canada held that a standard of review analysis is unnecessary where "the jurisprudence has already determined in a satisfactory manner the degree of deference to be accorded with regard to a particular category of question." The standard of review to be applied to an H&C decision is reasonableness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Reasonableness is also the standard of review applicable to the issue of whether the proper test was applied by an H&C Officer, which are issues of the Officer's interpretation of his home statute: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 54;
Alberta (Information and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 47, the Supreme Court of Canada explained what is required of a court reviewing on the reasonableness standard of review:
A court conducting a review for reasonableness inquires into the qualities that make a decision reasonable, referring both to the process of articulating the reasons and to outcomes. In judicial review, reasonableness is concerned mostly with the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process. But it is also concerned with whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law.
(1) Whether the Officer erred in assessing the Applicants' degree of establishment in Canada?
[14]
The Applicants submit that the Officer failed to properly review their evidence in relation to their degree of establishment in Canada. The Applicants contend that, in the present case, the Officer had a duty to discuss the specific factors in their evidence that led the Officer to make a particular decision relating to whether an exemption for H&C grounds was warranted. The Applicants also contend that the Officer failed to give weight to their establishment in Canada at all. I am obliged to disagree with both submissions.
[15]
First of all, these issues are essentially "inadequacy of reasons" arguments. Adequacy of reasons is not a stand-alone basis for quashing a decision, as both parties agreed and the Supreme Court decided. Any challenge to the reasoning and/or result of a decision must instead be made within the reasonableness standard of review:
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
Newfoundland Nurses
]. In this connection, the Supreme Court explained what is required of a tribunal's reasons in order to meet the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> criteria in
Newfoundland Nurses
at para 16:
Reasons may not include all the arguments, statutory provisions, jurisprudence or other details the reviewing judge would have preferred, but that does not impugn the validity of either the reasons or the result under a reasonableness analysis. A decision-maker is not required to make an explicit finding on each constituent element, however subordinate, leading to its final conclusion [...]. In other words, if the reasons allow the reviewing court to understand why the tribunal made its decision and permit it to determine whether the conclusion is within the range of acceptable outcomes, the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> criteria are met.
In understanding why the tribunal made its decision and assessing whether its conclusion is within the range of possible and acceptable outcomes, this Court may look at the factual components reported in the very decision under review itself even where those components are set out in different boxes on the same form. In my view it is a mistake to read only what is stated in the Reasons and Decision part of the decision as if that part of the decision was divorced from the factual considerations set out in the Establishment, BIOC and Risk components of the form, i.e., as set out by the Officer under "Factors for Consideration." In my view a decision of this nature, whether written in a continuous narrative, or written in boxes on a form as here, must be read contextually as a whole.
[16]
In the present case there is no complaint with the facts set out under the heading of Establishment, which I take to accurately summarize the evidence going to the Applicants' degree of establishment in Canada. The Officer found that the Applicants' degree of establishment was "expected and not exceptional". While under no duty to either recite every fact or argument or to make explicit findings on each constituent element, the Officer set out relevant evidence of establishment. When that evidence (reported on the Establishment part of the form) is read together with the discussion under Decision and Reasons as I have found must be done, the reasons for the Officer's conclusion on establishment are readily determinable. Although the Applicant's disagree with the Officer's conclusion, it is not the role of this Court to substitute its own opinion and weighing of the evidence for that of the Officer, provided the reasons meet the
Newfoundland Nurses'
test and are reasonable per <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . These tests are met, and in my view the Officer was within his or her jurisdiction to conclude that establishment was "expected and not exceptional".
[17]
The Applicants allege that they were not given reasons only conclusions. They say that the finding their establishment was "expected but not exceptional" is a conclusion, not a reason. I disagree. A conclusion would be a bald statement of a result, such as for example a statement that "the test for establishment is not made out" without more. But here, the Officer tells us why it was not made out - because establishment was as expected but not exceptional. In addition, the Officer gave several other reasons on the issue of establishment. He gave them credit for steady employment, study of the English language, improvement of their skills, good civil record, community involvement, volunteer efforts, and support of friends and community - and did so having identified evidence is support earlier in his reasons. Identification of these factors lets us know what was weighed in the balance in coming to the conclusion establishment was not exceptional. The Officer goes further to note there was insufficient evidence to indicate that the inadequate establishment was caused by circumstances beyond their control, or prolonged inability to leave Canada such that it would cause them unusual or disproportionate hardship to apply from outside Canada.
[18]
These reasons support the conclusion on establishment. I find that these reasons allow me to determine, as I do, that the decision falls within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes that are defensible in respect of the facts and law.
[19]
The Applicants second main argument on the reasons issue is that the Officer erred in discounting what establishment they achieved while pursuing legal means to remain in Canada. The impugned statement is as underlined below:
I now turn to the applicants' degree of establishment in Canada since their arrival in April 2008 (the father) and August 2008 (mother and minor child). I have taken into consideration the applicants' steady employment; their study of the English language; improvement of their skills; good civil record; community involvement; volunteer efforts; and support among their friends and community, all of which have helped both in their social and economic integration in Canada.
While I acknowledge that the applicants have taken positive steps in establishing themselves in Canada, I also note that they have received due process through the refugee and immigration program and were accordingly afforded the tools and opportunity to obtain a degree of establishment into Canadian society.
I have carefully reviewed the circumstances and submissions provided by the applicants and based on the evidence provided, the applicants' establishment in Canada was as expected and not exceptional. Consequently, I do not find the applicants' establishment in Canada justifies an exemption under humanitarian and compassionate considerations. Furthermore, I have been presented with insufficient evidence to indicate that the applicants' establishment was as a result of circumstances beyond their control or a prolonged inability to leave Canada, such that it would cause the applicants unusual or disproportionate hardship to apply from outside Canada. [emphasis added as noted above]
[20]
It was suggested that such a finding is impermissible and gives rise to judicial review in light of a passage in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. I disagree. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> calls for an analysis that gives credit to refugee claimants for initiatives they take, and other relevant circumstances, together with an analysis and assessment of the degree of a claimant's degree of establishment. The analysis and assessment must of course take place within the parameters laid down by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Newfoundland Nurses
, which in this case it did. In my view an Officer does not err in noting that delays occasioned by lawful engagement of our immigration system have assisted applicants to become more established, because in most if not all such cases that statement will be true. In the same way it is not an error for the Officer to refer to an applicant as having the support of friends and community. More generally, the Officer's statement is a true statement because establishment is a function of many factors over time. The more time one has, usually the more one will become established. More time generally tends to equal, or should in most cases, lead to a greater level of establishment.
[21]
On review of the record, I do not see the Officer as having improperly discounted time legitimately spent within the Canadian refugee system. Indeed, the Officer's treatment of the Applicants may also be viewed in light of the fact that the Officer could have, but appears not to have, discounted the Applicant's establishment after they unlawfully failed to appear and an arrest warrant was issued for them in January, 2011. This Court has indicated on several occasions that Officers should be reluctant to reward individuals for time accumulated in Canada without a legal right to remain, absent circumstances beyond their control:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Although the Officer did not reject the H&C on these grounds, the Applicants failed to appear and remain in Canada in the face of an active removal order. There is no need to supplement the Officer's reasons on this account, although the Court takes note of such unlawful conduct as did the Officer.
[22]
Taken as a whole, the Officer outlined the establishment considerations in a manner not complained of, and thereafter came to an intelligible and transparent conclusion that falls within the range of reasonable possible and acceptable outcomes per <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
(2) Whether the Officer erred in assessing the best interest of the child?
[23]
The Applicants submit that the Officer applied the wrong legal test when assessing the best interest of the child, particularly by referring to hardship when making the BIOC determination. They allege that the Officer failed to demonstrate that he was alert, alive and sensitive to the best interest of the child.
[24]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 30 the Federal Court of Appeal dealt with a case in which the officer "focused" on hardship in her consideration of the best interests of the children. The Court of appeal held that "[t]he fact that the officer focused her consideration of the children's best interests on the question of hardship does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that she failed to consider their best interests". From this, it is apparent that mention of "hardship" in the course of an analysis of BIOC is not enough to set aside the finding. This finding alone may very well determine this ground for judicial review against the Applicants.
[25]
In addition, however, the reasons as a whole must be reviewed to determine if the Officer strayed from a proper BIOC analysis. Mentioning hardship is not enough to trigger judicial review, as the Federal Court of Appeal said. Indeed, even focusing on hardship may not trigger judicial review in its view. Very often if not almost invariably, as the Applicants did here for example, H&C applicants in their BIOC submissions allege numerous negative adverse consequences for the child if he or she is removed, including inferior education, lower standard of living, criminality, and possible violence. Where, as here, the Applicants themselves alleged what may properly be characterized as "hardship" to the child if removed, an H&C Officers should not generally be faulted for using the word hardship in his or her analysis because doing so is simply and accurately summarizing the very consequences alleged by the Applicants.
[26]
Instead, a contextual analysis of the Officer's reasons is required where it is argued that the Officer has applied an impermissible "hardship" analysis. This case has similarities in this respect with
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> where I held:
[69] After a fairly detailed review of the evidence filed, the Officer concluded his BIOC analysis stating: "Overall, I am unable to conclude from the information before me that having to relocate to Columbia or Brazil would have a significant negative impact on" the Applicants. Regarding the BIOC analysis, I do not accept the Applicants' submission that the Officer applied the wrong legal test.
[70] Quite properly, there are neither verbal formulas nor magic words regarding the test for BIOC. However on judicial review, it is established that an officer must show that he or she is "alert, alive and sensitive" to the best interests of the child or children concerned. I conclude that the Officer met and applied this test in this case.
[71] I agree, as the Respondent submits, that "the fact that the children might be better off in Canada in terms of general comfort and future opportunities cannot [...] be conclusive in an H&C Decision that is intended to assess undue hardship" because the outcome would almost always favour Canada (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[72] For example, the Federal Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
supra
at para 30, dealt with considerations of hardship under the rubric of BIOC and held that an officer who "focused her consideration of the children's best interests on the question of hardship does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that she failed to consider their best interests." To the same effect is <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
supra
, quoted in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above.
[73] Given the acceptance of "hardship" as an element in the BIOC analyses in this jurisprudence, I conclude that reference by this Officer to "significant negative impact" does not constitute legal error in terms of the applicable legal test.
[27]
In the case at bar, the Officer set out the evidentiary considerations at the beginning of the decision form, in respect of which no complaint is made. The Officer charged him or herself with the proper test, namely best interest of the child, at the start of the BIOC assessment. The Officer noted that removal will not put the child in an exceptional situation. He found the child will not be in an unusual circumstance to justify a positive exemption. He noted the child is quite young and is learning the customs and culture in Canada, he noted he will have a chance to develop relationships with extended family members. The Officer found there will be no direct and adverse impact on the child. The Officer was entitled to make these findings in the course of giving his BIOC reasons. And I note that as the Officer reached his or her conclusion, he or she once again stated the proper test, namely best interest of the child.
[28]
Reading the BIOC factual considerations and the subsequent BIOC analysis and conclusion together and as a whole and in their entirety; I do not agree that the use of the words "unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship" in the discussion is grounds for judicial review. While such reference was not appropriate, as conceded at the hearing, I am unable to find that the Officer mis-stated or mis-applied the legal test for BIOC.
[29]
Additionally, and importantly in my view, the Officer found the Applicants had not established that the general consequences of relocating and resettling back to their home country would have a significant negative impact on the particular child in question. It is important to reiterate that the burden lies on the Applicants to establish the BIOC claim and to do so with relevant evidence. This Court recently addressed this issue in words that are appropriate for the case at bar, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[36] It is not enough to simply describe general conditions which are worse in the country of removal than conditions in Canada. The Applicant must show that he and the children would likely be subject to these conditions personally. As I wrote in
Serda
at para 31:
Finally, the Applicants have argued that conditions in Argentina are dismal and not good for raising children. They cited statistics from the documentation, which were also considered by the H&C Officer, to show that Canada is a more desirable place to live in general. But the fact that Canada is a more desirable place to live is not determinative on an H&C application ( ...); if it were otherwise, the huge majority of people living illegally in Canada would have to be granted permanent resident status for Humanitarian and Compassionate reasons. This is certainly not what Parliament intended in adopting section 25 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
.
[37] In the absence of any personalized evidence to the contrary, the Officer could reasonably conclude that the best interests of the children were to remain in the care of their parents, and that the hardships associated with relocation could reasonably be expected to be minimal given their young ages. There was no evidence that the children would not be able to access health care and education in Columbia or Mexico, and it was certainly not sufficient to show that Canada is a more favourable country to live than the country of origin of their parents. It is also to be presumed that the Officer considered the report submitted by the Applicant, even though he did not specifically address it.
[30]
I wish to add that counsel for the Applicant made submissions respecting the suggested protocol for assessing the best interest of the child formulated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. In my view, H&C officers are not required to follow a formula. I considered this issue in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  articulation of but one of many approaches to the [best interest of the child] analysis. This Court upheld other approaches to a [best interest of the child] analysis subsequent to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> this Court confirmed that the test set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was a useful guideline, but was only one method of assessing the [best interest of the child]. What really matters in assessing the [best interest of the child] is whether the Officer is "alert, alive and sensitive" to that children's interests (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[31]
In summary, on the issue of BIOC, I find the Officer applied the correct legal test, and I also conclude that the Officer's BIOC finding falls within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law. The reasons are transparent and intelligible. Judicial review is not open on BIOC.
V.
Conclusion
[32]
Overall, I find that the Officer's decision was justified, transparent and intelligible both with respect to establishment and best interests of the child. It falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law. Therefore, this application for judicial review is dismissed.
VI.
Certification of Question
[33]
Orally and at the end of her submissions, counsel for the Respondent requested that I certify questions relating to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision in the event I found <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was applicable. Counsel for the Applicants opposed the request, noting that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was but one example of how to approach the issue of the best interests of the child. Given that neither I nor the Officer have accepted the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> analysis, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is not dispositive of this case and, accordingly, no question is certified. No other question was proposed or arises.
JUDGMENT
[34]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application for judicial review is dismissed, no question is certified and there is no order as to costs.
.........................
Manuel Alejandro Osorio Diaz, Carolina Rodriguez Gutierrez et  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  est saisie de la demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée par Manuel Alejandro Osorio Diaz, Carolina Rodriguez Gutierrez et Alejandro Alfonso Osorio Rodriguez [les demandeurs], en application du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [la LIPR], visant la décision du 27 septembre 2013 par laquelle un agent d'immigration [l'agent] a rejeté la demande de résidence permanente au Canada des demandeurs fondée sur des considérations humanitaires. Je suis d'avis, pour les motifs que je vais exposer, qu'il y a lieu d'annuler cette décision.
I.
Faits
[2]
Manuel Alejandro Osorio Diaz est né le 20 mars 1979. Son épouse, Carolina Rodriguez Gutierrez, est née le 21 août 1978 et leur fils à tous deux, Alejandro Alfonso Osorio Rodriguez, est né le 6 octobre 2004. Les demandeurs sont tous des citoyens du Mexique.
[3]
Les demandeurs sont entrés au Canada à titre de résidents temporaires le 27 avril 2008 (le père) et en août 2008 (la mère et le fils). Ils ont demandé l'asile le 30 septembre 2008 et, le même jour, une mesure d'interdiction de séjour a été prise contre eux. Le 30 septembre 2009, la Section de la protection des réfugiés [la SPR] de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié a rejeté leurs demandes d'asile. Les demandeurs ont sollicité l'autorisation de présenter une demande de contrôle judiciaire visant la décision défavorable de la SPR mais, le 1er février 2010, la Cour a rejeté cette demande. Leur demande d'examen des risques avant renvoi a elle aussi été rejetée, le 16 décembre 2010. Le 24 février 2011, un mandat d'arrestation pour renvoi a été délivré contre les demandeurs parce que, le 20 janvier 2011, ils avaient omis de se présenter devant l'Agence des services frontaliers du Canada [l'ASFC] à une entrevue préalable au renvoi, tel qu'on le leur avait enjoint.
[4]
Le 14 juin 2012, les demandeurs ont présenté une demande de résidence permanente au Canada fondée sur des considérations humanitaires. Le 27 septembre 2013, l'agent a rejeté cette demande. Les demandeurs ont sollicité l'autorisation de présenter une demande de contrôle judiciaire visant la décision de l'agent et, le 19 décembre 2014, leur demande d'autorisation a été accueillie.
II.
Décision faisant l'objet du contrôle judiciaire
[5]
L'agent a d'abord exposé sommairement les arguments des demandeurs, en résumant les faits de l'affaire de manière assez détaillée sous la rubrique du formulaire utilisé « Facteurs à prendre en considération ». Les arguments relatifs tant à l' « Établissement au Canada » et à l' « Intérêt supérieur de l'enfant » sont résumés séparément dans le formulaire. Les demandeurs ne mettent pas en question le caractère adéquat de l'un ou l'autre résumé. L'agent a résumé les faits concernant les « Risques et conditions défavorables dans le pays » sous une rubrique différente du formulaire et les conclusions énoncées à cet égard ne sont pas contestées dans le cadre de la présente demande.
[6]
L'agent a ensuite consigné son analyse et ses motifs sous la rubrique suivante du formulaire portant le titre « Décision et motifs ». L'agent a comme il se doit indiqué qu'il incombait aux demandeurs de convaincre le décideur que leur situation personnelle était telle que les difficultés occasionnées par l'obligation d'obtenir depuis l'étranger un visa de résident permanent selon le mode habituel seraient 1) inhabituelles et injustifiées, ou 2) excessives. L'agent a aussi fait état de l'historique de la procédure d'immigration des demandeurs au Canada, et notamment du fait qu'il existait un mandat d'arrestation en vue de leur renvoi lorsqu'a été rendue la décision relative à des motifs d'ordre humanitaire à l'examen.
A.
Établissement au Canada
[7]
L'agent a reconnu que les demandeurs avaient noué des relations avec divers amis et membres de leur communauté depuis leur arrivée au Canada, mais il a conclu que la rupture de ces nouveaux liens n'occasionnerait pas des difficultés justifiant de les dispenser de l'obligation prévue par la loi de présenter depuis l'étranger leurs demandes de visas d'immigrant. L'agent a souligné que tous les membres de la famille des demandeurs, ainsi que leurs anciens amis et collègues, habitaient toujours au Mexique, et qu'il était raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'ils leur offrent leur soutien à leur retour dans ce pays. L'agent a conclu que, s'il se pouvait que les demandeurs aient quelque mal à s'adapter à leur retour au Mexique, ils ne se heurteraient pas à des difficultés inhabituelles et injustifiées, ou excessives, de sorte que l'octroi d'une dispense pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire n'était pas justifié.
[8]
L'agent a reconnu que les emplois stables des demandeurs, les cours d'anglais qu'ils avaient suivis, le perfectionnement de leurs compétences, leur bon dossier civil, leur engagement communautaire, leur apport bénévole, et le soutien d'amis et de membres de la communauté dont ils disposaient au Canada favorisaient leur intégration sociale et économique au pays. L'agent a conclu que les demandeurs avaient pris des mesures concrètes pour s'établir au Canada, mais que leur intégration et leur établissement au pays étaient d'un degré auquel on pouvait s'attendre et non de nature exceptionnelle. L'agent a donc conclu que l'établissement des demandeurs au Canada ne justifiait pas de leur octroyer une dispense fondée sur des motifs d'ordre humanitaire. L'agent a ajouté qu'on lui avait présenté trop peu d'éléments de preuve pour conclure que le degré d'établissement des demandeurs résultait de circonstances indépendantes de leur volonté ou de l'impossibilité prolongée de quitter le Canada, de telle sorte que l'obligation de présenter leur demande depuis l'étranger leur causerait des difficultés inhabituelles ou excessives.
B.
Intérêt supérieur de l'enfant
[9]
L'agent a reconnu que le demandeur mineur allait se retrouver dans un nouvel environnement socio-économique après le renvoi, mais il a conclu que ce n'était pas là [traduction] « une situation exceptionnelle » ou « une situation inhabituelle justifiant d'accorder une dispense ». L'agent a aussi conclu que, comme le demandeur mineur était très jeune et apprenait encore à connaître les coutumes et la culture canadiennes, aller vivre maintenant au Mexique et avoir l'occasion d'y nouer des liens avec les membres de sa famille élargie ne nuirait pas à son développement et n'occasionnerait pas des difficultés inhabituelles et injustifiées ou excessives. Tout en reconnaissant que, s'il se pouvait que le Mexique n'offre pas la même qualité de vie que le Canada et que le degré de violence y soit élevé dans certaines régions, l'agent a néanmoins conclu que ces facteurs n'auraient pas d'[traduction] « effets défavorables directs » sur le demandeur mineur. L'agent a pris en considération:
[traduction] l'intérêt supérieur de [l'enfant] ainsi que la situation personnelle des membres de la famille, et conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas démontré que les conséquences générales d'un déménagement et d'une réinstallation dans leur pays d'origine auraient pour lui des répercussions défavorables importantes. J'ai examiné l'intérêt supérieur de [l'enfant] avec soin et j'en suis venu à la conclusion que sa situation, dûment prise en compte, ne justifiait pas l'octroi d'une dispense pour des raisons d'ordre humanitaire.
C.
Risques et conditions défavorables dans le pays
[10]
Les demandeurs ont fait état de la discrimination généralisée dont sont victimes les femmes au Mexique, et soutenu que Mme Rodriguez, en particulier, serait exposée à des difficultés advenant son retour dans ce pays. En ce qui concerne ces allégations, l'agent a fait remarquer que les demandeurs n'avaient fourni aucun détail quant à des problèmes de discrimination subis par Mme Rodriguez elle-même dans le passé, ni étayé l'existence de tels problèmes par des documents, pour l'aider à évaluer la mesure dans laquelle la demanderesse avait été touchée personnellement ou directement. L'agent n'était donc pas convaincu qu'un retour au Mexique occasionnerait à Mme Rodriguez, en raison de la discrimination sexuelle y sévissant, des difficultés inhabituelles et injustifiées ou excessives.
[11]
Quant au niveau de violence et de criminalité prévalant au Mexique, et aux conditions économiques défavorables auxquels les demandeurs se heurteraient en y retournant, l'agent a conclu que c'était une situation vécue de manière générale par la population du pays. Les demandeurs n'avaient pas établi, a aussi conclu l'agent, que les difficultés découlant de la situation générale dans ce pays étaient inhabituelles et injustifiées ou excessives.
III.
Questions en litige
[12]
La présente affaire soulève les questions suivantes:
(1) L'agent a-t-il fait erreur en procédant à l'évaluation du degré d'établissement des demandeurs au Canada?
(2) L'agent a-t-il fait erreur en procédant à l'évaluation de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant?
IV.
Norme de contrôle
[13]
Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], la Cour suprême du Canada a précisé (paragraphes 57 et 62) qu'il n'était pas nécessaire de se livrer à une analyse relative à la norme de contrôle « si la jurisprudence établit déjà de manière satisfaisante le degré de déférence correspondant à une catégorie de questions en particulier ». La norme de la décision raisonnable est la norme qui s'applique au contrôle d'une décision relative à des motifs d'ordre humanitaire (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], ainsi qu'à la question de savoir si l'agent décideur a appliqué le bon critère, puisque dans ce cas l'interprétation qu'il a faite de sa propre loi constitutive entre en jeu ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 54;
Alberta (Information and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 47, la Cour suprême du Canada explique ce que l'on attend de la cour de révision qui applique la norme de contrôle de la décision raisonnable:
La cour de révision se demande dès lors si la décision et sa justification possèdent les attributs de la raisonnabilité. Le caractère raisonnable tient principalement à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit.
(1) L'agent a-t-il fait erreur en procédant à l'évaluation du degré d'établissement des demandeurs au Canada?
[14]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que l'agent n'a pas procédé à un examen adéquat de leurs preuves concernant le degré d'établissement au Canada. Selon eux, l'agent était tenu en l'espèce de traiter des éléments précis de leur preuve l'ayant conduit à décider si l'octroi d'une dispense pour motifs d'ordre humanitaire était ou non justifié. Les demandeurs font aussi valoir que l'agent n'a accordé aucun poids à leur degré d'établissement au Canada. Je ne puis souscrire à ni l'un ni l'autre argument.
[15]
En premier lieu, il s'agit essentiellement d'arguments relatifs à « l'insuffisance des motifs ». L'insuffisance des motifs ne permet pas à elle seule de casser une décision, tel que la Cour suprême en a décidé et comme en ont convenu les parties. Plutôt, le raisonnement qui sous-tend la décision ou le résultat ne peut être remis en question que dans le cadre de l'analyse du caractère raisonnable de la décision (
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 22 [
Newfoundland Nurses
]). La Cour suprême a expliqué comme suit, dans l'arrêt
Newfoundland Nurses
(au paragraphe 16), les critères auxquels doivent satisfaire les motifs d'un tribunal pour qu'ils répondent aux critères établis dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
Il se peut que les motifs ne fassent pas référence à tous les arguments, dispositions législatives, précédents ou autres détails que le juge siégeant en révision aurait voulu y lire, mais cela ne met pas en doute leur validité ni celle du résultat au terme de l'analyse du caractère raisonnable de la décision. Le décideur n'est pas tenu de tirer une conclusion explicite sur chaque élément constitutif du raisonnement, si subordonné soit-il, qui a mené à sa conclusion finale [...]. En d'autres termes, les motifs répondent aux critères établis dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> s'ils permettent à la cour de révision de comprendre le fondement de la décision du tribunal et de déterminer si la conclusion fait partie des issues possibles acceptables.
En vue de comprendre le fondement de la décision du tribunal et d'évaluer si la conclusion tirée appartient aux issues possibles acceptables, la Cour peut examiner les éléments factuels rapportés dans la décision à l'examen, et ce, même si ceux-ci sont consignés dans différentes cases d'un formulaire. À mon avis, il serait erroné de ne lire que ce qui se trouve sous la rubrique Décision et motifs de la décision, comme si cette partie et les éléments factuels énoncés aux rubriques Établissement, Intérêt supérieur de l'enfant et Risques du formulaire, c'est-à-dire ceux relevés par l'agent au titre des « Facteurs à prendre en considération », étaient disjoints. Selon moi, il faut interpréter en contexte et de manière globale une telle décision, qu'elle soit consignée dans des cases comme en l'espèce, ou exposée sous forme de récit continu.
[16]
Les faits énoncés sous la rubrique Établissement ne sont pas contestés en l'espèce, et je tiens pour acquis que la preuve présentée quant au degré d'établissement des demandeurs au Canada y est résumée fidèlement. L'agent a conclu que l'établissement des demandeurs au pays était d'un degré [traduction] « auquel on pouvait s'attendre et non de nature exceptionnelle ». Même si l'agent n'avait pas à faire état de chaque fait ou argument ni à tirer expressément des conclusions à l'égard de chaque élément constitutif de la décision, il a exposé les éléments de preuve pertinents liés à l'établissement. Lorsqu'on interprète ces éléments de preuve (consignés sous la rubrique Établissement du formulaire) en parallèle avec les commentaires énoncés sous la rubrique Décision et motifs, comme j'ai conclu qu'il convenait de le faire, les motifs de la conclusion de l'agent sur l'établissement se dégagent sans problème. Bien que les demandeurs ne souscrivent pas à la conclusion tirée par l'agent, la Cour n'a pas à substituer sa propre opinion à celle de l'agent, ni à apprécier de nouveau les preuves, l'exigence étant plutôt que les motifs répondent au critère établi dans l'arrêt
Newfoundland Nurses
, et qu'ils soient raisonnables au sens de l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . L'un et l'autre critères ont été respectés et, à mon avis, il était loisible à l'agent de conclure que l'établissement des demandeurs était d'un degré [traduction] « auquel on pouvait s'attendre et non de nature exceptionnelle ».
[17]
Les demandeurs avancent qu'on leur a uniquement communiqué des conclusions, et non des motifs. Conclure que leur établissement au pays était d'un degré [traduction] « auquel on pouvait s'attendre et non de nature exceptionnelle » constitue selon eux une simple conclusion et non pas des motifs. Je ne suis pas d'accord. Une conclusion serait l'énonciation pure et simple de l'issue, par exemple une déclaration portant, sans plus, que les demandeurs n'ont [traduction] « pas répondu au critère de l'établissement ». En l'espèce, toutefois, l'agent nous dit pourquoi il a jugé que le critère n'était pas rempli: le degré d'établissement des demandeurs était d'un degré auquel on pouvait s'attendre, et n'était pas exceptionnel. De plus l'agent a fourni plusieurs autres motifs, sur la question de l'établissement. Il a pris acte de plusieurs points positifs: les emplois stables des demandeurs, les cours d'anglais suivis, le perfectionnement de leurs compétences, leur bon dossier civil, leur engagement communautaire, leur apport bénévole et le soutien d'amis et de membres de la communauté dont ils disposaient - et cela après avoir relevé précédemment dans ses motifs divers éléments de preuve à l'appui. La mention de ces facteurs nous permet de savoir ce que l'agent a mis dans la balance avant de conclure que leur degré d'établissement n'était pas exceptionnel. L'agent a ajouté qu'on lui avait présenté trop peu d'éléments de preuve pour lui permettre de conclure que le degré d'établissement insuffisant des demandeurs résultait de circonstances indépendantes de leur volonté ou de l'impossibilité prolongée de quitter le Canada, de telle sorte que l'obligation de présenter leur demande depuis l'étranger leur causerait des difficultés inhabituelles ou excessives.
[18]
Ces motifs étayent la conclusion tirée par l'agent sur l'établissement. Je conclus que ces motifs me permettent de conclure, et je conclus, que la décision appartient aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit.
[19]
Les demandeurs soulèvent un deuxième argument majeur au sujet de la question des motifs: l'agent aurait commis une erreur en faisant abstraction de la mesure dans laquelle ils avaient réussi à s'établir au Canada pendant qu'ils exerçaient divers recours en vue de demeurer au pays. La déclaration contestée de l'agent est soulignée ci-dessous:
[traduction] Je me pencherai maintenant sur le degré d'établissement des demandeurs depuis leur arrivée au Canada en avril 2008 (dans le cas du père) et en août 2008 (dans le cas de la mère et de l'enfant mineur). J'ai pris en considération les emplois stables des demandeurs, les cours d'anglais qu'ils ont suivis, le perfectionnement de leurs compétences, leur bon dossier civil, leur engagement communautaire, leur apport bénévole, et le soutien d'amis et de membres de la communauté dont ils disposent au Canada, tout cela favorisant leur intégration sociale et économique au pays.
Tout en reconnaissant que les demandeurs ont pris des mesures concrètes pour s'établir au Canada, je relève également qu'ils ont bénéficié de l'application régulière de la loi dans le cadre du programme d'immigration et de protection des réfugiés et qu'on leur a ainsi fourni l'occasion d'atteindre un certain degré d'établissement au sein de la société canadienne et accordé les outils pour y parvenir.
J'ai examiné avec soin la situation et les observations des demandeurs et, au vu des preuves produites, j'estime que leur établissement au pays était d'un degré auquel on pouvait s'attendre et non de nature exceptionnelle. Je ne suis donc pas d'avis que l'établissement des demandeurs au Canada justifie de leur accorder une dispense pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire. En outre, on m'a présenté trop peu d'éléments de preuve pour conclure que le degré d'établissement des demandeurs résulte de circonstances indépendantes de leur volonté ou de l'impossibilité prolongée de quitter le Canada, de telle sorte que l'obligation de présenter leur demande depuis l'étranger leur causerait des difficultés inhabituelles ou excessives.
[Non souligné dans l'original tel que déjà mentionné.]
[20]
Les demandeurs ont fait valoir, en s'appuyant sur un passage de la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , qu'une telle conclusion était inadmissible et susceptible de contrôle judiciaire. Je ne suis pas de cet avis. Selon la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , l'analyse doit tenir compte des initiatives prises par les demandeurs d'asile, et des autres faits pertinents, et qu'on procède également à un examen et une évaluation de l'importance de leur degré d'établissement. L'examen et l'évaluation doivent bien sûr respecter les paramètres définis par la Cour suprême du Canada dans l'arrêt
Newfoundland Nurses
; tel est le cas en l'espèce. J'estime qu'un agent ne commet pas d'erreur en relevant que les délais occasionnés par le recours licite à notre système d'immigration ont rendu plus important le degré d'établissement de demandeurs, puisque dans la plupart des cas, sinon tous, cela s'avérera être vrai. De la même façon, l'agent ne commet pas d'erreur en faisant état du soutien d'amis et de membres de la communauté dont un demandeur dispose. De manière plus générale, la déclaration de l'agent reflète la réalité puisque l'établissement est fonction, au fil du temps, de nombreux facteurs. Plus longue est la période de temps dont dispose un demandeur, plus important sera habituellement son degré d'établissement. Une période de temps plus longue donne généralement lieu -ou devrait dans la plupart des cas donner lieu - à un degré plus élevé d'établissement.
[21]
Au vu du dossier, l'agent ne m'apparaît pas avoir fait abstraction indûment du temps où les demandeurs ont fait légitimement appel au système canadien de protection des réfugiés. On pourrait d'ailleurs tenir compte du fait, dans l'examen du traitement réservé par l'agent aux demandeurs, que ce dernier aurait pu faire abstraction - ce qui ne semble toutefois ne pas avoir été le cas -, aux fins d'évaluation du degré d'établissement, de la période suivant le moment (en janvier 2011) où ils ont omis illégalement de se présenter en vue de leur renvoi et ils ont fait l'objet d'un mandat d'arrestation. La Cour a déclaré à plusieurs reprises que les agents devaient se montrer réticents à récompenser des personnes pour le temps qu'elles ont vécu au Canada sans avoir le droit d'y demeurer, dans des circonstances n'échappant pas à leur volonté, d'y demeurer (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 14;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Quoique l'agent n'ait pas rejeté la demande fondée sur des raisons d'ordre humanitaire pour ces motifs, il reste que les demandeurs ont omis de se présenter en vue de leur renvoi et ils sont demeurés au Canada alors qu'ils étaient visés par une mesure de renvoi. Il n'y a rien à ajouter aux motifs de l'agent sur ce point, mais la Cour prend acte, comme celui-ci l'a fait, du comportement illégal des demandeurs.
[22]
Globalement, l'exposé des facteurs d'évaluation de l'établissement fait par l'agent n'a pas été critiqué, et il est arrivé par la suite a une conclusion intelligible et transparente qui appartient aux issues raisonnables possibles et acceptables au sens de l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
(2) L'agent a-t-il fait erreur en procédant à l'évaluation de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant?
[23]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que l'agent n'a pas appliqué le bon critère juridique pour évaluer l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, plus précisément en faisant entrer en jeu la question des difficultés lorsqu'il s'est prononcé sur cette question. Selon eux, l'agent n'a pas démontré qu'il était réceptif, attentif et sensible à l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant.
[24]
Dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la Cour d'appel fédérale a traité du cas d'une agente ayant « axé » son examen de l'intérêt supérieur des enfants sur la question des difficultés, et la Cour a conclu comme suit, au paragraphe 30: « Le fait que l'agente ait axé son examen de l'intérêt supérieur des enfants sur la question des difficultés ne permet pas nécessairement de conclure qu'elle n'a pas tenu compte de leur intérêt supérieur ». Il en ressort clairement que la mention des « difficultés » lors de l'analyse de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant ne suffit pas pour annuler la conclusion de l'agent. Cette conclusion pourrait très bien à elle seule justifier que je rejette ce motif de contrôle judiciaire.
[25]
Cependant, il faut également examiner les motifs globalement pour déterminer si l'agent s'est écarté d'une analyse appropriée de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant. La Cour d'appel fédérale a déclaré que la mention de difficultés ne justifiait pas à elle seule un contrôle judiciaire. D'ailleurs, selon elle, même une analyse axée sur les difficultés pourrait ne pas justifier l'intervention de la Cour. Très souvent, comme les demandeurs l'ont fait en l'espèce par exemple, sinon presque toujours, les auteurs d'une demande fondée sur des motifs d'ordre humanitaire invoquent dans leurs observations sur l'intérêt supérieur un bon nombre de conséquences défavorables advenant le renvoi de l'enfant, y compris un niveau médiocre d'éducation, un niveau de vie inférieur et la possibilité d'être exposé à la criminalité et à des actes de violence. Lorsque comme en l'espèce, les demandeurs font eux-mêmes valoir ce qu'on pourrait dûment qualifier de « difficultés » subies par l'enfant en cas de renvoi, l'agent saisi de la demande fondée sur des motifs d'ordre humanitaire ne pourra habituellement pas être blâmé pour avoir employé l'expression « difficultés » dans son analyse, puisque se faisant, il résume simplement et fidèlement les conséquences alléguées par les demandeurs eux-mêmes.
[26]
Il faut plutôt procéder à une analyse contextuelle des motifs lorsqu'un demandeur soutient qu'un agent s'est appuyé sur une analyse des « difficultés » inacceptable. Il y a des similitudes à cet égard entre la présente affaire et l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  où j'ai fait les commentaires suivants (aux paragraphes 69 à 73):
[69] Après un examen relativement approfondi des éléments de preuve présentés, l'agente a conclu de la façon suivante son analyse relative à l'intérêt supérieur des enfants: [traduction] « De manière générale, compte tenu des renseignements dont je dispose, je suis incapable de conclure que la réinstallation des demanderesses en Colombie ou au Brésil aurait des répercussions défavorables importantes sur [...] » les demanderesses. Je n'accepte pas la prétention des demanderesses selon laquelle l'agente a appliqué le mauvais critère juridique dans le cadre de l'analyse relative à l'intérêt supérieur des enfants.
[70] C'est à juste titre que le critère de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant ne prévoit aucune expression figée ni formule magique. Cependant, dans le cadre d'un contrôle judiciaire, il est de droit constant qu'il faut que l'agent se soit montré réceptif, attentif et sensible à l'intérêt supérieur des enfants visés. Je conclus que l'agente a respecté et appliqué ce critère en l'espèce.
[71] Je conviens avec le défendeur que « [l] e fait que les enfants puissent se trouver mieux au Canada, sur le plan du confort en général ou celui des possibilités futures, ne saurait [...] être concluant dans une décision en matière de motifs d'ordre humanitaire qui a pour objet de voir s'il y a des difficultés excessives » puisque l'issue serait presque toujours en faveur du Canada (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), au paragraphe 5;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[72] Par exemple, au paragraphe 30 de l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, la Cour d'appel fédérale s'est penchée sur la question des difficultés dans le cadre de l'analyse relative à l'intérêt supérieur des enfants et elle a conclu que le fait que l'agente a « axé son examen de l'intérêt supérieur des enfants sur la question des difficultés ne permet pas nécessairement de conclure qu'elle n'a pas tenu compte de leur intérêt supérieur ».La même conclusion a été tirée dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, lequel a été cité dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité.
[73] Puisqu'il est reconnu dans ces précédents que les « difficultés » font partie intégrante de l'analyse relative à l'intérêt supérieur des enfants, je conclus que la mention des [traduction] « répercussions défavorables importantes » par l'agente ne constitue pas une erreur en droit quant au critère juridique applicable.
[27]
En l'espèce, l'agent a exposé les éléments de preuve pris en considération au début du formulaire de décision, et nulle critique n'a été formulée en ce qui a trait à cet exposé. L'agent a fait état dès le départ du bon critère, soit l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, lorsqu'il a procédé à l'évaluation de ce facteur. L'agent a mentionné que le renvoi ne placerait pas l'enfant dans une situation exceptionnelle. Il a conclu que l'enfant ne se trouverait pas dans une situation inhabituelle qui justifierait de lui octroyer une dispense. L'agent a souligné que l'enfant était bien jeune et apprenait encore à connaître les coutumes et la culture canadiennes, et qu'il aurait par ailleurs l'occasion de nouer des liens avec les membres de sa famille élargie. Il a conclu que l'enfant ne subirait aucun effet défavorable direct. Il était loisible à l'agent de tirer ces conclusions dans le cadre de son exposé des motifs sur l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant. De plus, je relève qu'en concluant de la sorte, l'agent a fait état encore une fois du bon critère, celui de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant.
[28]
En tenant compte globalement et dans leur ensemble de tous les éléments factuels exposés sur l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, ainsi que de l'analyse et de la conclusion ayant suivi, je suis d'avis que l'emploi par l'agent des mots « difficultés inhabituelles et injustifiées ou excessives » dans son analyse ne constitue pas un motif de contrôle judiciaire. Bien que cette mention n'ait pas été judicieuse, comme il a été concédé à l'audience, je ne puis conclure que l'agent a mal formulé ou appliqué le critère juridique relatif à l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant.
[29]
En outre, et plus important encore selon moi, l'agent a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas démontré que les conséquences générales d'un déménagement et d'une réinstallation dans leur pays d'origine auraient des répercussions défavorables importantes sur leur enfant. Il importe de souligner à nouveau qu'en ce qui concerne l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, il incombe aux demandeurs d'établir le bien-fondé de leurs prétentions, au moyen d'éléments de preuve pertinents. La Cour s'est récemment penchée sur cette question en des termes pertinents dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 37:
[36] Il ne suffit pas de décrire simplement les conditions générales qui sont pires dans le pays de renvoi, comparativement aux conditions prévalant au Canada. Le demandeur doit démontrer la probabilité que lui et ses enfants soient assujettis à ces conditions personnellement. Comme je l'ai écrit dans la décision
Serda
, au paragraphe 31:
Enfin, les demandeurs font valoir que la situation en Argentine est pitoyable et néfaste pour les enfants. Ils citent des statistiques tirées de la preuve documentaire que l'agente d'immigration a elle-même examinée pour démontrer que le Canada est un endroit plus agréable pour vivre en général. Mais le fait que le Canada soit un endroit plus agréable pour vivre n'est pas un facteur déterminant dans l'issue d'une demande fondée sur des raisons d'ordre humanitaires [...]; s'il en était autrement, il faudrait donner à la vaste majorité des personnes qui vivent illégalement au Canada le statut de résident permanent pour des raisons d'ordre humanitaire. De toute évidence, telle n'était pas l'intention du Parlement lorsqu'il a promulgué l'article 25 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
.
[37] En l'absence d'éléments probants de nature personnelle démontrant le contraire, l'agent pouvait raisonnablement conclure que l'intérêt supérieur des enfants était de demeurer aux bons soins de leurs parents et qu'on pouvait s'attendre raisonnablement que les difficultés associées à leur réinstallation seraient minimales compte tenu de leur jeune âge. Aucune preuve n'indiquait que les enfants n'accéderaient pas aux soins de santé et à l'éducation en Colombie ou au Mexique, et il n'était assurément pas suffisant de démontrer que le Canada est un endroit plus agréable pour vivre que le pays d'origine de leurs parents. Il convient également de présumer que l'agent a examiné le rapport présenté par le demandeur, même s'il n'y a pas fait mention spécifiquement.
[30]
Je veux aussi relever que l'avocate des demandeurs a présenté des observations sur le protocole proposé pour l'évaluation de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Or, selon moi, les agents appelés à se prononcer sur une demande fondée sur des motifs d'ordre humanitaire n'ont pas à s'en tenir à une formule. Je me suis penché sur la question dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  nombreuses méthodes d'analyse de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant. La Cour a confirmé d'autres méthodes d'analyse depuis la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 37, 39 et 41.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> la Cour a confirmé que le critère énoncé dans la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> pouvait être utile, mais qu'il ne s'agissait là que de l'une des méthodes d'évaluation de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant. Ce qui importe vraiment lorsqu'on apprécie l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, c'est de savoir si l'agent est « réceptif, attentif et sensible » à l'intérêt de cet enfant (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[31]
Quant à la question de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, pour résumer, je conclus que l'agent a appliqué le bon critère juridique, et que sa conclusion sur cette question appartient aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit. Les motifs sont transparents et intelligibles. La décision quant à l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant n'est pas sujette à un contrôle judiciaire.
V.
Conclusion
[32]
Dans l'ensemble, je conclus que la décision de l'agent était justifiée, transparente et intelligible en ce qui concerne les questions tant de l'établissement que de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant. La décision appartient aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit. La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est par conséquent rejetée.
VI.
Certification d'une question
[33]
Oralement et à la fin de ses observations, l'avocate du défendeur a demandé que je certifie des questions en lien avec la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> si je devais juger cette dernière décision applicable. L'avocate des demandeurs s'y est opposée, en faisant valoir que cette décision n'offrait qu'un exemple parmi d'autres de mode d'évaluation de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant. Comme toutefois ni moi ni l'agent n'avons retenu l'analyse suggérée dans la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , cette dernière n'est pas déterminante dans la présente affaire, de sorte qu'aucune question y ayant trait n'est certifiée. Aucune autre question susceptible de certification n'a été proposée, ni n'a été soulevée dans la présente affaire.
JUGEMENT
[34]
LA COUR ORDONNNE:
la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée, aucune question n'est certifiée, et aucuns dépens ne sont adjugés.
[End of document]