 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Can. (M.C.I.) v. Gabor (2015), 475 F.T.R. 200 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2015] F.T.R. TBEd. FE.047 
 
 
 
 The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (applicant) v. Tomas Gabor (respondent) 
 
 (IMM-6854-13; 2015 FC 168) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Gabor 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Shore, J. 
 
 February 10, 2015. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Refugee Protection Division found that the applicant, a citizen of the Czech Republic, was a Convention refugee under s. 96 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Persecution - Protection of country of nationality or citizenship (internal flight alternative) - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1326.4 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1326.4 
 
 Admission - Refugees protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Refugee Protection Division and Refugee Appeal Division - Reasons - Gabor, a 20 year old citizen of the Czech Republic who was deaf and of Roma ethnicity, claimed refugee status - The Refugee Protection Division (RPD) relied on a letter from Gabor's school principal to find that Gabor would not be able to effectively access state protection in the Czech Republic because of his intellectual and communication difficulties - The RPD concluded that Gabor was a Convention refugee given the likelihood that he would face problems based on his Roma ethnicity and many other issues, and the lack of ability to access state protection - The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review - The Federal Court allowed the application - The RPD's analysis of Gabor's claim was limited to five paragraphs - In determining the availability of state protection, the RPD failed to adequately consider the evidentiary record in conjunction with evidence attesting to Gabor's particular circumstances - The RPD provided little, if any, guidance as to how it came to its conclusion - Its reasons were inadequate - It was insufficient for a decision maker to simply state a conclusion. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Gordon Lee, for the applicant; 
 
 D. Clifford Luyt and George J. Kubes, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 D. Clifford Luyt and George J. Kubes, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application for judicial review was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on February 10, 2015, before Shore, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment and reasons on the same date. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I.  
 Overview 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Shore, J. 
 : This is a decision which could have been, in all likelihood, positive to the Respondent; however, it was not adequate in its articulation to grant refugee status to the Respondent. This is due to its vagueness as it has no reference to the significant subjective and objective evidence whatsoever. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The fragility or vulnerability of the human condition of the Respondent appears evident from the credible evidentiary record; however, the Refugee Protection Division [RPD] says nothing of significance to demonstrate the encyclopaedia of references, the dictionary of terms, the gallery of portraits and the harmony between the subjective and objective evidence. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  This decision is an editorial; thus, it is not a reasonable decision with adequate reasons, be they even brief. A decision, to be reasonable, must show, not tell; otherwise, the decision becomes an editorial. Reasons, in a decision must describe, by the trier of fact, albeit briefly, how the trier of fact reached a conclusion; that is not shown in this case. The watch words must be: "show, don't tell". 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Background 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  This is an application for judicial review by the Applicant Minister pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA], of a decision dated September 6, 2013, wherein the RPD accepted the Respondent's claim for refugee protection under section 96 of the IRPA. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The Respondent is a 20-year old man of the Roma ethnic group and citizen of the Czech Republic. The Respondent is deaf and communicates through sign language. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The Respondent has been subjected to harassment and verbal abuse on account of his Roma ethnicity. At the age of twelve, on his way home from school, the Respondent was attacked, pushed and kicked to the ground by skinheads. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Impugned Decision 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The RPD rendered its decision orally on July 24, 2013 and issued written reasons on September 6, 2013. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The RPD's analysis of the Respondent's claim is limited to five paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  First, relying on a letter provided by the Respondent's school principal, the RPD finds that the Respondent would not be able to effectively access state protection in the Czech Republic because of his intellectual and communicational difficulties. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Second, the RPD concludes that, "given that he is likely to face problems based on being Roma and [m] any other issued, and this lack of the ability to access state protection", the Applicant is a Convention refugee under section 96 of the IRPA (RPD Decision, at para 9). 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The issue central to the application is whether the RPD's decision is reasonable. 
 
 
 
 A.  
 Availability of State Protection 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The jurisprudence establishes that in order for a finding to be made under section 96 of the IRPA, a refugee claimant must establish both a subjective and an objectively well-founded fear of persecution ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  In assessing the availability of state protection, the RPD is required to conduct a case-by-case analysis, on the basis of the documentary evidence before it and having regard to a claimant's particular circumstances ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED;  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Moreover, the burden of proof which lies upon claimants in rebutting the presumption of state protection is directly proportional to the level of democracy in the country considered ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED;  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Accordingly, the RPD is required to assess the availability of state protection at the operational level. The RPD must not only consider the practical effectiveness of measures taken by the state in protecting its citizens, but also evidence of a claimant's concrete efforts in seeking such protection ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 B.  
 Adequacy of Reasons 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  In determining the reasonableness of the RPD's decision, the Court is required to consider the RPD's reasons "together with the outcome", while serving "the purpose of showing whether the result falls within a range of possible outcomes". By corollary, the Court is required to show "respect for the decision-making process of adjudicative bodies with regard to both the facts and the law" ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Although, insufficiency of reasons is not, in and of itself, a ground upon which a decision may be overturned, this Court has found that the RPD's reasons must nevertheless meet a minimal threshold: 
 
 
 
 [4] While the decision of the Board should not be read hyper-critically, it must meet certain standards. If the reasons for decision given by the Board are so inadequate that they fail to provide a clear basis for the reasoning behind its decision, the decision will be quashed ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). As stated in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, "the reasoning process followed by the decision-maker must be set out and must reflect consideration of the main relevant factors". Most importantly, a rejected claimant (and this Court) should be able to understand the reasons why the claim was rejected. In this case, that is impossible. 
 
 
 
 ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Moreover, notwithstanding the presumption that the RPD considered the evidence as a whole, its burden of considering specific evidence increases with the relevance of the evidence to the disputed facts ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 , the Supreme Court provides guidance in assessing the adequacy of reasons: 
 
 
 
 [16] Reasons may not include all the arguments, statutory provisions, jurisprudence or other details the reviewing judge would have preferred, but that does not impugn the validity of either the reasons or the result under a reasonableness analysis. A decision-maker is not required to make an explicit finding on each constituent element, however subordinate, leading to its final conclusion [citation omitted].  
 In other words, if the reasons allow the reviewing court to understand why the tribunal made its decision and permit it to determine whether the conclusion is within the range of acceptable outcomes, the FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED criteria are met 
 . [Emphasis added.] 
 
 
 
 ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 C.  
 The Reasonableness of the RPD's Decision 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The RPD's reasons are minimal, and rather opaque. In determining the availability of state protection, the RPD failed to adequately consider the evidentiary record before it in conjunction with evidence attesting to the Respondent's particular circumstances ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). The RPD provides little - if any - guidance as to how it came to its conclusion. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  Mindful of the deference owed by this Court towards the RPD's decision and the Supreme Court's reasoning in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , the Court finds that the requirements of adequacy of reasons and overall reasonableness of the RPD's decision have not been met ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED;  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  Indeed, it is insufficient for a decision maker to simply state a conclusion ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED: 
 
 
 
 [5] In my opinion, in a forward looking analysis of a claim under s. 96 and s. 97 it is first necessary to accurately describe who it is and what it is against which protection is to be provided, and then to determine whether the protection that is provided is, in fact, adequate. In the present case, in reaching the conclusion that "there is adequate state protection in Hungary", I find that the RPD's cursory analysis of the issue certainly fails to meet this reasonable expectation. 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  In light of the above, by failing to provide minimal reasons and analysis in rendering its decisions, the RPD's decision fails to meet the requirements of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED;  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  The application for judicial review must therefore be granted. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [25] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
 
 
 
 1. The application for judicial review is granted; 
 
 
 
 2. There is no serious question of general importance to be certified. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: J. Danielle King/bk 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




