 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 1067)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Zinn, J.
September 11, 2012.
Counsel:
Lindsey Weppler, for the applicant;
Tessa Kroeker, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Blanshay & Lewis, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. SE.019.
[1]
Zinn, J.
: Ms. Jiang asks the Court to set aside the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board which found that she was not a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection. For the reasons that follow, this application is dismissed.
Background
[2]
Ms. Jiang is a citizen of China and has claimed refugee status because she fears persecution by the Chinese authorities as a result of being a Falun Gong practitioner. Her adherence to Falun Gong stems from difficulties in her marriage which arose in 2007 when it became clear that the couple would be unable to conceive a child together, as a result of an operation the husband had undergone in his early life. The applicant became very depressed and her health suffered as a result.
[3]
At the time of these difficulties, a sympathetic friend shared her experience with Falun Gong and how it helped her overcome her personal difficulties. This friend gave the applicant the book "Zhuan Falun", written by Master Li. After reading Master Li's book, the applicant asked her friend to teach her the five sets of exercises. Once she was able to practice on her own, she joined her friend's practice group. Ms. Jiang says that her condition improved dramatically over six months of practice.
[4]
On July 20, 2009, the applicant was at her Falun Gong instructor's home when the instructor received warning from a lookout that the Public Security Bureau [PSB] was approaching. The instructor arranged for his students, including the applicant, to escape through the back door.
[5]
The applicant fled but did not go home. Instead, she hid at a friend's house. While in hiding, the applicant learned that the PSB had come to her home twice to arrest her and that her husband had threatened to inform on her. To the applicant's knowledge, no summonses were left behind by the PSB. With the help of a friend and through a smuggler, the applicant fled to Canada on September 5, 2009. She testified that up to August 2010, the PSB came looking for her at her former residence a total of six times.
[6]
The Board rendered oral reasons for rejecting her claim. The Board found "on the basis of ... cumulative concerns and negative inferences ... on a balance of probabilities, that the [applicant] was not a Falun Gong practitioner in China and that she is not being pursued by the PSB." Moreover, the Board found that the applicant "became a Falun Gong practitioner in this country only to support [her] fraudulent claim for protection and that she is not now a genuine Falun Gong practitioner."
[7]
The Board based its decision on three issues it identified in the applicant's testimony.
[8]
First, because the applicant admitted knowing that Falun Gong was illegal and potentially dangerous in China, it seemed to the Board "reasonable that she would have investigated alternatives rather than simply accepting the risk of practicing Falun Gong." The Board was also concerned about what it held to be, after several questions as to why she did not seek medical help, an embellishment by the applicant, namely that her friend also told her that doctors would not help her.
[9]
Second, the Board found there to be a discrepancy in the applicant's testimony, specifically the dates she told her husband and in-laws, with whom she lived, that she was practising Falun Gong. The Board stated that it was only once this discrepancy was raised that she nuanced her answer by saying that she told her husband on one date and her in-laws on another date. In support of its finding of a discrepancy in the applicant's testimony, the Board held it was "reasonable to assume that if she told her husband in January, her in-laws would have been aware of it at that time as well."
[10]
Third, based on country documentary evidence, the Board found that, on the balance of probabilities, the PSB would have left a summons if it were looking for the applicant, especially since it allegedly came for her several times.
Issues
[11]
The applicant raises two issues:
1. Did the Board err in its assessment of the applicant's credibility?
2. Alternatively, did the Board err in failing to assess the applicant's
sur place
claim?
1.
Credibility Assessment
[12]
The Board's credibility findings (in relation to the applicant's reasons for choosing Falun Gong, the discrepancy in dates, and the lack of summonses) are entitled to deference and reviewable on the standard of reasonableness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
Reasons for Choosing Falun Gong
[13]
The Board found it irrational and therefore not credible that the applicant would have chosen to practice Falun Gong, which was potentially (politically) dangerous, without first seeking medical attention and treatment through medication.
[14]
The applicant provided an explanation as to why she did not seek medical help and medication. Her first response was that a family member told her that depression is complicated and that she should be more open and take it easy. When pressed by the Member on this issue, she offered that she was told by the person who introduced her to Falun Gong that professional doctors would not help.
Q. Did you seek medical attention? Depression is a medically treated illness.
A. I did not.
Q. Why not?
A. Well my mother-in-law said that because one of the relatives is a doctor they said the situation is quite compound - is very hard to heal, you have to be more open and take it easy.
Q. Now you said you have 15 years of education; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Why didn't you seek professional help?
A. No, I only took sleeping pills because on my mother's side they had a relative who is a daughter that had said so.
Q. I understand, but depression is treatable by medication. Why didn't you seek professional help"
A. (no response)
Q. Why didn't you seek professional help before risking arrest by practicing Falun Gong?
A. At the time I did not see any doctor - did not see a doctor.
Q. I know that and I'm trying to understand why you did not go to a doctor before risking arrest by practicing Falun Gong?
A. Well because my situation is my own personal problem of wanting something, and then it will not be cured.
Q. So rather than see a doctor you decide that you practice Falun Gong and risk arrest and imprisonment; is that what you're telling me?
A. Well, yes, because my co-worker said that, "Well, your situation of depression/insomnia even if you go to a doctor ..." -- the co-worker said it will not help to go see professional doctors, and only when you practice the Falun Gong will it help.
Q. Well that's different testimony than what you gave earlier about your co-worker.
[15]
I can find no fault with the Member's view that the last response was an embellishment given that it conflicts with her earlier response which was challenged by the Member.
[16]
I cannot say that the Member's view that a well educated person would first try to address depression, a condition that is medically treated (a fact not challenged by the applicant), through legal means first before resorting to a practice that could subject her to arrest and imprisonment, is unreasonable.
Discrepancy in Dates
[17]
While I do not share the Board's view that because her in-laws shared the house with the applicant and her husband, it is reasonable to assume that if she told her husband in January that she was practicing Falun Gong, "her in-laws would have been aware of it at that time as well," I do share the Board's view that the applicant's evidence was contradictory on the question of when she told them she was practicing Falun Gong and thus find its assessment of her evidence in this regard to be reasonable.
[18]
The applicant first states that she told "them"(meaning her husband and in-laws) that she had started to practice Falun Gong in January 2008. She later testifies that she told her mother-in-law in March.
Q. And this is when you told them you were a practitioner?
A. In January I had told my husband, and then it was in March my mother-in-law also knew.
Q. Knew what?
A. She knew that I would go and practice Falun Gong with a group.
Lack of a Summons
[19]
The Board drew a negative inference from the lack of summonses produced by the applicant:
The claimant indicated that the PSB came to her home approximately seven times up to August 2010, but no summons was left. Country documentary evidence2indicates that a summons is generally left with a family of an absconding person of interest to the PSB. This document further indicates that this policy is not always followed but I find, on a balance of probabilities, that it is reasonable to assume in the context of alleged
multiple
visits by the PSB that a summons would have been left. Therefore, I draw a further negative inference in this regard.
[20]
The applicant cites recent decisions of this Court which have held that "a finding by the Board that on a balance of probabilities it would be reasonable to assume that a summons would have been left is a reviewable error:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The respondent submits that the jurisprudence subsequent to
Liang
indicates that the issue is not as clear cut as suggested and that "each case must be determined on its facts and on how those facts were assessed by the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[21]
In my view, every case must be assessed based on the evidence before the Board and its assessment of that evidence. With respect to this particular submission, I adopt and agree with the comments of Justice Mosley in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
The Board drew a negative inference from the lack of a summons in part because the applicant claimed that the PSB had visited his home nine times. Considering the evidence on the uneven enforcement practice of the PSB, this may have been unreasonable (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). However, this one inference was not determinative and is not sufficient to render the entire decision unreasonable.
[22]
I find that even if the Board's finding relating to the lack of a summon is disregarded, there remains a sufficient basis to support the Board's finding that her story was not to be believed when one applies the test of reasonableness in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and the deference which the Court must give to the Board's decision.
[23]
For these reasons, I find that the applicant has failed to convince me that the decision under review is not reasonable.
2.
Sur Place
Claim
[24]
The Board found on a balance of probabilities that the applicant's refugee claim was fraudulent. It further found that on the basis of the totality of its findings, her current knowledge was gained only in order to support her fraudulent claim and that she is not now a genuine Falun Gong practitioner.
[25]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in failing to properly assess her
sur place
claim. In particular, she says that "the Board erred in implying that even though she appeared to be a Falun Gong practitioner she was not genuine without any basis other than its references to events in China."
[26]
The real question is whether the Board was entitled to, and reasonably imported its findings in relation to the fraudulent claim into the applicant's
sur place
claim, namely to impute that the applicant was not a genuine Falun Gong practitioner.
[27]
In my view, the Board must be entitled to import its credibility findings into its assessment of an applicant's
sur place
claim. The Board here found that the applicant had fabricated her story to claim refugee protection. A reasonable inference from that premise is that her current knowledge, appearance in photos, and letters of support were fostered in the intervening two years to support that fraudulent claim.
[28]
This Court has held that it is permissible for the Board to assess an applicant's genuineness and therefore its
sur place
claim in light of credibility concerns relating to the original authenticity of a claim:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[29]
Further, there was relatively little evidence before the Board that the applicant was a Falun Gong practitioner in Canada. The documentary evidence before the Board was nine photographs showing the applicant and others apparently in front of Falun Gong banners in various locations, sometimes wearing Falun Gong t-shirts, and a terse letter from an alleged fellow practitioner confirming that the two often practised Falun Gong together on the weekends, participated in some activities organized by the Falun Gong Association in Toronto, and that the application was a real Falun Gong practitioner.
[30]
At the hearing, the Board's questions were limited to an assessment of the applicant's knowledge of Falun Gong theory and practice. The Board was satisfied with the applicant's knowledge, but the applicant gave no other testimony as to her practice of Falun Gong in Canada. It is noted that despite the opportunity, counsel did not ask her any questions. Nor did the applicant call her fellow practitioner to testify, or any other witness.
[31]
The Board weighed the competing evidence. On one hand, the applicant's claim was found to be fraudulent. The applicant also provided very little evidence overall. On the other hand, the applicant demonstrated knowledge of Falun Gong and had some, though very weak, documentary evidence in support of her claim. The applicant had two years to learn Falun Gong theory in Canada. The Board weighed the evidence and found that the applicant was not a genuine practitioner. I find that its finding fell "within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law."
[32]
Neither party proposed a question for certification.
JUDGMENT
[33]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application is dismissed and no question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Jiang demande à la Cour d'annuler la décision par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Commission) a conclu qu'elle n'avait pas qualité de réfugiée au sens de la Convention ou de personne à protéger. Pour les motifs exposés ci-après, la présente demande est rejetée.
Les faits à l'origine du litige
[2]
Citoyenne de la Chine, Mme Jiang a présenté une demande d'asile parce qu'elle craint d'être persécutée par les autorités chinoises du fait qu'elle est une adepte du Falun Gong. Son adhésion au Falun Gong découle de problèmes conjugaux qui ont débuté en 2007, lorsqu'il est devenu évident que le couple serait incapable de concevoir un enfant, par suite d'une intervention que l'époux avait subie pendant sa jeunesse. La demanderesse est devenue très déprimée et son état de santé s'est détérioré.
[3]
Lorsque ces problèmes sont survenus, une amie sympathique a parlé à la demanderesse de son expérience et lui a dit à quel point le fait de pratiquer le Falun Gong l'avait aidée à surmonter ses problèmes personnels. Cette amie a donné à la demanderesse le livre intitulé « Zhuan Falun », rédigé par maître Li. Après avoir lu le livre en question, la demanderesse a demandé à son amie de lui enseigner les cinq séries d'exercices. Lorsqu'elle a été capable de faire ces exercices seule, elle s'est jointe au groupe de pratiquants de son amie. Mme Jiang affirme que son état s'est grandement amélioré après six mois de pratique.
[4]
Le 20 juillet 2009, la demanderesse se trouvait au domicile de la personne qui lui enseignait la pratique du Falun Gong lorsque l'instructeur a été prévenu par un guetteur que des représentants du Public Security Bureau (PSB) s'approchaient. L'instructeur a demandé à ses étudiants, y compris la demanderesse, de s'enfuir en sortant par la porte arrière.
[5]
La demanderesse s'est enfuie, mais elle n'est pas allée chez elle. Elle s'est plutôt cachée dans la maison d'un ami. Alors qu'elle se cachait, la demanderesse a appris que des représentants du PSB étaient allés deux fois chez elle pour l'arrêter et que son époux avait menacé de la dénoncer. D'après ce que la demanderesse a su, les représentants du PSB n'ont laissé aucune assignation. Avec l'aide d'un ami et d'un passeur, la demanderesse s'est enfuie au Canada le 5 septembre 2009. Elle a déclaré pendant son témoignage que, jusqu'en août 2010, des représentants du PSB étaient allés six fois à son ancienne résidence pour la voir.
[6]
La Commission a rejeté la demande d'asile de la demanderesse pour des motifs qu'elle a prononcés de vive voix. Elle a conclu que « [...] compte tenu des préoccupations et des conclusions défavorables qui se sont accumulées,[...] selon la prépondérance des probabilités, la [demanderesse] n'était pas une adepte du Falun Gong en Chine et qu'elle n'est pas poursuivie par le PSB ». De plus, la Commission a conclu que la demanderesse« est devenue une adepte du Falun Gong au Canada uniquement pour étayer une demande d'asile trompeuse et que, actuellement, elle n'est pas une véritable adepte de ce mouvement ».
[7]
La Commission a fondé sa décision sur trois problèmes qu'elle a relevés dans le témoignage de la demanderesse.
[8]
D'abord, étant donné que la demanderesse avait admis savoir que la pratique du Falun Gong était illégale, voire dangereuse en Chine, il a semblé à la Commission qu'il était « raisonnable qu'elle examine d'autres possibilités plutôt que de simplement s'exposer au risque associé à la pratique du Falun Gong ». La Commission était également préoccupée par ce qu'elle a considéré, après avoir demandé à maintes reprises à la demanderesse pourquoi elle n'avait pas consulté un médecin, comme un embellissement de la part de celle-ci, soit le fait que son amie lui avait également dit que les médecins ne l'aideraient pas.
[9]
En deuxième lieu, la Commission a relevé une incohérence dans le témoignage de la demanderesse, notamment en ce qui a trait aux dates auxquelles elle aurait informé son époux et ses beaux-parents, avec lesquels elle vivait, qu'elle pratiquait le Falun Gong. La Commission a souligné que ce n'est que lorsque cette incohérence a été soulevée que la demanderesse a nuancé sa réponse en disant qu'elle avait informé son époux à une certaine date et ses beaux-parents à une autre. Au soutien de sa conclusion relative à l'existence d'une incohérence dans le témoignage de la demanderesse, la Commission a jugé qu'il était « raisonnable de présumer que, si elle l'a dit à son époux en janvier, ses beaux-parents l'auraient appris à ce moment-là ».
[10]
En troisième lieu, en se fondant sur la preuve documentaire relative à la situation du pays, la Commission a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, les représentants du PSB auraient laissé une assignation s'ils recherchaient la demanderesse, étant donné, surtout, qu'ils étaient apparemment allés plusieurs fois chez elle.
Les questions en litige
[11]
La demanderesse soulève deux questions à trancher:
1. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur dans son appréciation de la crédibilité de la demanderesse?
2. Subsidiairement, la Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en omettant d'évaluer la demande d'asile sur place de la demanderesse?
1.
Appréciation de la crédibilité
[12]
Les conclusions de la Commission au sujet de la crédibilité (en ce qui a trait aux raisons pour lesquelles la demanderesse a choisi le Falun Gong, à la différence de dates et à l'absence d'assignation) appellent la retenue et sont susceptibles de contrôle judiciaire selon la norme de la décision raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
Raisons pour lesquelles la demanderesse a choisi le Falun Gong
[13]
La Commission a conclu qu'il était illogique et, par conséquent, qu'il n'était pas crédible que la demanderesse ait choisi de pratiquer le Falun Gong, laquelle activité pouvait être dangereuse (sur le plan politique), sans d'abord consulter un médecin et être traitée par des médicaments.
[14]
La demanderesse a expliqué pourquoi elle n'avait pas consulté de médecin et n'avait pas pris de médicaments. Elle a d'abord souligné qu'un membre de la famille lui avait dit que la dépression était complexe et qu'elle devrait se montrer plus ouverte et se reposer. Lorsque le commissaire lui a demandé plus de précisions à ce sujet, elle a ajouté que la personne qui lui avait parlé du Falun Gong lui avait dit que les médecins professionnels ne l'aideraient pas.
[traduction]
Q. Avez-vous consulté un médecin? La dépression est une maladie qui peut être traitée par des soins médicaux.
R. Je ne l'ai pas fait.
Q. Pourquoi?
R. Ma belle-mère m'a dit que, d'après un membre de la famille qui est médecin, la situation est assez complexe; il est difficile d'en guérir, vous devez vous montrer plus ouvert et vous reposer.
Q. Vous avez dit aussi que vous aviez 15 ans de scolarité, n'est-ce pas?
R. Oui.
Q. Pourquoi n'avez-vous pas cherché à obtenir de l'aide d'un professionnel?
R. J'ai simplement pris des pilules pour dormir, parce qu'une personne du côté de ma mère qui est médecin a dit que c'était ce qu'il fallait faire.
Q. Je comprends, mais la dépression peut se soigner par des médicaments. Pourquoi n'avez-vous pas tenté d'obtenir de l'aide d'un professionnel?
R. (pas de réponse)
Q. Pourquoi n'avez-vous pas tenté d'obtenir de l'aide d'un professionnel avant de risquer de vous faire arrêter en pratiquant le Falun Gong?
R. À l'époque, je n'ai pas vu de médecin, je n'ai vu aucun médecin.
Q. Je sais ça et j'essaie de comprendre pourquoi vous n'êtes pas allée voir de médecin avant de risquer de vous faire arrêter en pratiquant le Falun Gong?
R. Parce que ma situation est mon propre problème; je désire quelque chose, mais la situation ne sera pas corrigée.
Q. Alors plutôt que de consulter un médecin, vous décidez de pratiquer le Falun Gong et de risquer de vous faire arrêter et emprisonner; c'est ça que vous me dites?
R. Oui, parce que ma collègue de travail m'a dit [traduction] « Ton problème de dépression/d'insomnie, même si tu vas voir un médecin [...] » - la collègue m'a dit que cela ne me donnera rien d'aller voir des médecins professionnels et que seule la pratique du Falun Gong m'aidera.
Q. C'est une version différente de celle que vous avez donnée précédemment au sujet de votre collègue de travail.
[15]
La conclusion du commissaire selon laquelle la dernière réponse était un embellissement ne m'apparaît pas erronée, étant donné que cette réponse va à l'encontre de la réponse précédente que la demanderesse a donnée et que le commissaire a mise en doute.
[16]
Je ne puis qualifier de déraisonnable l'opinion du commissaire selon laquelle une personne instruite tenterait d'abord de soigner la dépression dont elle est atteinte, laquelle peut se traiter par des soins médicaux (ce que la demanderesse n'a pas contesté), en ayant recours à des moyens légaux plutôt qu'en se tournant vers une pratique qui l'exposerait au risque de se faire arrêter et emprisonner.
Différence de dates
[17]
Même si je ne suis pas d'accord avec la Commission lorsqu'elle dit que, étant donné que les beaux-parents de la demanderesse vivaient dans la même maison que le couple, il est raisonnable de présumer que, si la demanderesse a informé son époux en janvier qu'elle pratiquait le Falun Gong, « ses beaux-parents l'auraient appris à ce moment-là », j'admets, comme la Commission l'a souligné, que la demanderesse a présenté un témoignage contradictoire sur la question de la date à laquelle elle a informé ses beaux-parents qu'elle pratiquait le Falun Gong et j'estime donc que l'appréciation que la Commission a faite de cet aspect du témoignage est raisonnable.
[18]
La demanderesse déclare d'abord qu'elle« leur » a dit (c'est-à-dire à son époux et à ses beaux-parents) qu'elle avait commencé à pratiquer le Falun Gong en janvier 2008. Plus tard, elle affirme qu'elle a informé sa belle-mère en mars.
[traduction]
Q. Et c'est à ce moment-là que vous leur avez dit que vous étiez une adepte du Falun Gong?
R. J'ai informé mon mari en janvier, et en mars, ma belle-mère était également au courant.
Q. Au courant de quoi?
R. Elle savait que je pratiquais le Falun Gong avec un groupe.
Absence d'assignation
[19]
La Commission a tiré une conclusion défavorable du fait que la demanderesse n'a produit aucune assignation:
La demandeure d'asile a mentionné qu'un représentant du PSB était allé chez elle environ sept fois jusqu'en août 2010, mais qu'il n'avait laissé aucune assignation. Selon la preuve documentaire sur le pays2, une assignation est généralement laissée à la famille d'une personne qui s'esquive qui suscite l'intérêt du PSB. Dans ce document, il est également mentionné que cette politique n'est pas toujours appliquée. Néanmoins, j'estime que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, il est raisonnable de présumer, compte tenu des nombreuses visites alléguées du PSB, qu'une assignation aurait été laissée. Par conséquent, je tire de nouveau une conclusion défavorable à cet égard.
[20]
La demanderesse cite des récentes décisions dans lesquelles la Cour fédérale a jugé qu'une conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle, d'après la prépondérance des probabilités, il serait raisonnable de présumer qu'une assignation aurait été laissée constitue une erreur susceptible de contrôle judiciaire:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Selon le défendeur, il appert des décisions rendues après
Liang
que la question n'est pas tranchée de façon aussi nette que ce que la demanderesse laisse entendre et que chaque affaire dépend des faits qui lui sont propres et de la façon dont la Commission a évalué ces faits:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[21]
À mon avis, chaque affaire doit être évaluée en fonction de la preuve dont la Commission était saisie et de la façon dont elle a apprécié cette preuve. À cet égard, je souscris aux commentaires que le juge Mosley a formulés dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[traduction]
Si la Commission a tiré de l'absence d'assignation une inférence défavorable, c'est en partie parce que le demandeur affirmait que le PSB s'était, à neuf reprises, rendu chez lui. Compte tenu de la preuve démontrant un manque d'uniformité dans la manière de procéder du PSB, cela était peut-être déraisonnable (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 18). L'inférence tirée sur ce point n'était cependant pas déterminante et ne permet pas à elle seule de dire que la décision dans son ensemble est déraisonnable.
[22]
J'estime que, même si la conclusion de la Commission au sujet de l'absence d'assignation est écartée, il reste encore suffisamment d'éléments pour étayer sa conclusion selon laquelle la version de la demanderesse ne pouvait être crue, compte tenu du critère de la décision raisonnable qui a été énoncé dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ainsi que la retenue dont la Cour doit faire montre à l'égard de la décision de la Commission.
[23]
En conséquence, la demanderesse ne m'a pas convaincu que la décision faisant l'objet du présent contrôle judiciaire n'est pas raisonnable.
2.
La demande sur place
[24]
La Commission a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, la demande d'asile de la demanderesse était frauduleuse. Elle a également jugé que, d'après l'ensemble de ses conclusions, la demanderesse n'a acquis ses connaissances actuelles que pour étayer sa demande frauduleuse et n'est pas une véritable adepte du Falun Gong à l'heure actuelle.
[25]
La demanderesse reproche à la Commission d'avoir commis une erreur en omettant d'évaluer en bonne et due forme sa demande d'asile sur place. Plus précisément, elle affirme que [traduction] « la Commission a commis une erreur en sous-entendant que, même si elle semblait être une adepte du Falun Gong, elle ne l'était pas vraiment, sans se fonder sur des éléments autres que les événements survenus en Chine ».
[26]
La véritable question qui se pose est de savoir si la Commission avait le droit et s'il était raisonnable de sa part d'intégrer ses conclusions concernant la demande d'asile frauduleuse dans la demande d'asile sur place de la demanderesse, c'est-à-dire de présumer que celle-ci n'était pas une véritable adepte du Falun Gong.
[27]
À mon avis, la Commission doit avoir le droit d'intégrer ses conclusions sur la crédibilité dans son appréciation de la demande d'asile sur place d'un demandeur. Dans la présente affaire, la Commission a conclu que la demanderesse avait fabriqué son histoire afin de demander l'asile. Il est raisonnable de déduire de cette constatation que les connaissances actuelles de la demanderesse, les photographies d'elle-même et les lettres de soutien obtenues pendant l'intervalle de deux ans visaient à étayer cette demande frauduleuse.
[28]
La Cour fédérale a déjà décidé qu'il est permis à la Commission d'évaluer la sincérité d'un demandeur et, par conséquent, la demande d'asile sur place de celui-ci au regard des préoccupations relatives à la crédibilité se rapportant à l'authenticité initiale d'une demande d'asile:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[29]
De plus, la preuve établissant que la demanderesse était une adepte du Falun Gong au Canada était relativement mince. La Commission a été saisie de neuf photographies qui avaient apparemment été prises devant des bannières du Falun Gong à différents endroits et qui montraient la demanderesse et d'autres personnes portant à l'occasion des t-shirts du Falun Gong, ainsi que d'une lettre succincte dans laquelle un copratiquant aurait confirmé qu'il pratiquait souvent le Falun Gong avec la demanderesse la fin de semaine, qu'ils participaient ensemble à des activités organisées par la Falun Gong Association à Toronto et que la demanderesse était une véritable adepte du Falun Gong.
[30]
À l'audience, les questions de la Commission se sont limitées à une appréciation des connaissances que la demanderesse avait au sujet de la théorie et de la pratique du Falun Gong. La Commission était satisfaite des connaissances de la demanderesse, mais celle-ci n'a pas donné d'autres précisions au sujet de sa pratique du Falun Gong au Canada. Malgré l'occasion qu'elle a eue de le faire, l'avocate de la demanderesse ne lui a pas posé la moindre question à ce sujet. De plus, la demanderesse n'a pas fait témoigner d'autres personnes, y compris celle qui pratiquait le Falun Gong avec elle.
[31]
La Commission a soupesé les éléments de preuve contradictoires. D'une part, elle a jugé que la demande d'asile de la demanderesse était frauduleuse. De plus, dans l'ensemble, la preuve que la demanderesse a fournie était ténue. Par ailleurs, la demanderesse a établi qu'elle avait une certaine connaissance du Falun Gong et elle a présenté des éléments de preuve documentaires, si faibles soient-ils, au soutien de sa demande. La demanderesse a disposé d'une période de deux ans pour apprendre la théorie du Falun Gong au Canada. La Commission a soupesé la preuve et conclu que la demanderesse n'était pas une véritable adepte. Je suis d'avis que sa conclusion appartenait aux « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ».
[32]
Aucune partie n'a proposé de question à certifier.
JUGEMENT
[33]
La présente demande est rejetée et aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]