 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Alcon Canada Inc., Alcon Research Ltd., Alcon Pharmaceuticals, Ltd. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 525)
Indexed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Gleason, J.
May 30, 2014.
Counsel:
None disclosed.
Solicitors of Record:
Belmore Neidrauer LLP, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Deeth Williams Wall LLP, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent, Cobalt Pharmaceutical Company.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Gleason, J.
: The applicants [called, collectively,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in these Reasons] commenced two prohibition applications, seeking to restrain the Minister of Health [the Minister] from issuing Notices of Compliance [NOCs] under the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133 [the
NOC Regulations
] to the respondent, Cobalt Pharmaceuticals Company [Cobalt], for eye drops containing 0.1% and 0.2% concentrations of olopatadine. The application in respect of the 0.1% solution was made in Court File T-505-12 and that in respect of the 0.2% solution in Court File T-504-12.
[2]
Both applications were scheduled to be argued before me over the course of five days between December 9 and 13, 2013. On December 4, 2013, Alcon discontinued its application in Court File T-505-12 and advised that it was not relying on Canadian Patent No. 2,195,094 [the 094 Patent] in respect of its application in Court File T-504-12. In my Judgment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  issued on February 14, 2014, I dismissed Alcon's application to prohibit the Minister from issuing an NOC to Cobalt for its 0.2% olopatadine ophthalmic solution product and directed Alcon and Cobalt to provide submissions on costs in respect of both applications.
[3]
These Reasons deal with costs in both files.
I. Court File T-505-12
[4]
The Notice of Application in this matter was filed on March 8, 2012 and, as noted, the application was discontinued just five days before it was scheduled to be argued.
[5]
Cobalt seeks solicitor-client costs in this file in the amount of $430,000.00, payable forthwith, which it alleges is equal to the actual costs it incurred in this matter from April 12, 2012 to December 4, 2013 as well as its estimated fees in relation to the costs submissions. In the alternative, Cobalt seeks a lump sum award, beyond the upper end of Column V of Tariff B to the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106 [the Rules], in the amount of $200,000.00, likewise payable forthwith. It argues that Alcon's conduct merits censure and the imposition of either solicitor-client costs or an elevated costs award.
[6]
Cobalt's claims in this regard centre on what transpired in an earlier prohibition application in respect of the 094 Patent that Alcon commenced against Apotex Inc.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in respect of that company's 0.1% olopatadine ophthalmic solution in Court File T-564-10. That application was heard by my colleague, Justice Barnes, who reserved his decision on the merits. Following the hearing, Alcon and Apotex jointly requested that the decision not be released as they were attempting to settle the application. On consent, counsel for Alcon wrote to the Court on March 30, 2012 and requested that Justice Barnes not release his decision until April 12, 2012, the day before the statutory stay was set to expire. However, counsel's March 30, 2012 letter was not brought to Justice Barnes' attention, and he issued his decision in Court File T-564-10 on April 11, 2012 [Justice Barnes' Decision]. In it, he dismissed Alcon's prohibition application, finding that the 094 Patent failed on the ground of obviousness.
[7]
Almost immediately thereafter, counsel for Alcon wrote to counsel for Apotex, indicating he had received instructions to request the Court that it:
... retract the decision if possible, because i) the parties had asked that it not be released until April 12, pending settlement; and ii) the parties have now reached agreement on all material points and were at the point of today asking the Court for an extension of the statutory stay period, by one month, pending putting together a formal agreement.
[8]
It appears from the decision of Justice Mesbur in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  about which more is said below, that counsel for Apotex received instructions to agree to this proposal, called the Registry of this Court on April 11th and conveyed the message he and counsel for Alcon had agreed to. However, the Registry appears to have advised Justice Barnes that Alcon and Apotex had requested withdrawal of his Judgment as they had settled the application. Therefore, on April 12, 2013 Justice Barnes issued the following Direction:
Upon being advised by the parties that a full settlement of this litigation has been negotiated coincidental with the issuance of the Court's Judgment and with their consent the Court's Judgment is hereby withdrawn.
[9]
The next day, Alcon filed a Notice of Discontinuance with the Court in the prohibition application involving Apotex's 0.1% olopatadine solution.
[10]
Thereafter, Alcon and Apotex continued their discussions but were unable to agree to final settlement documentation. In October of 2012, Alcon made an application to the Ontario Superior Court of Justice to enforce the settlement it claimed it had reached with Apotex.
[11]
On July 22, 2013, Justice Mesbur released her decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's application to enforce the settlement and decided that no settlement had been reached because both parties had negotiated on the basis that any agreement they reached was tentative and subject to the approval of their respective principals. As this approval was not given by Apotex (after it learned of the outcome reached by Justice Barnes), Justice Mesbur held that the prohibition application in respect of Apotex's 0.1% olopatadine product had not been settled. Alcon did not appeal Justice Mesbur's decision.
[12]
In August of 2013, Apotex wrote to this Court seeking to rely on Justice Barnes' Decision in connection with another proceeding between Apotex and Alcon involving olopatadine where Alcon was relying in part on the 094 Patent. In the context of the subsequent back and forth between Apotex and Alcon, Apotex argued that the withdrawn decision should be reinstated. Alcon disagreed. Ultimately, Apotex decided not to pursue the reinstatement of Justice Barnes' Decision.
[13]
In October of 2013, Cobalt wrote to this Court, also seeking reinstatement of Justice Barnes' Decision. In his October 22nd letter to the Court, counsel for Cobalt stated that his client first learned of the outcome in the withdrawn decision when Justice Mesbur's decision was released in July 2013. However, it appears from the materials filed by Cobalt in connection with its claim for costs in this matter that counsel for Cobalt reviewed the recorded entries in this Court's file in the Alcon-Apotex prohibition matter in April 2012. Those entries reveal that a Judgment had been issued on April 11, 2012 and was withdrawn on consent the following day due to a settlement having been reached by the parties. The entries, however, did not reveal the outcome reached in the withdrawn Judgment. Thus, in April 2012 Cobalt was aware only that Justice Barnes' Decision had been withdrawn, but did not learn of the outcome reached by Justice Barnes until July 2013.
[14]
On December 3, 2013, Justice Barnes held a hearing to deal with Cobalt's request to reinstate his Decision; Alcon argued against the Decision's being reinstated.
[15]
Justice Barnes granted Cobalt's motion from the bench, issued his Decision
nunc pro tunc
as of April 11, 2012 and awarded Cobalt costs on the reinstatement motion in the amount of $10,000.00, payable by Alcon. In so awarding Justice Barnes was critical of the conduct of Alcon (and Apotex), stating at page 5 of his Order that he:
disagree[d] with Alcon's argument that by filing a Notice of Discontinuance, the Court is deprived of the jurisdiction to grant relief. It is not open to any party to obtain an order on the strength of the miscommunication or misunderstanding by the Court and then to preserve the effect of the order by unilaterally discontinuing the proceeding. That is particularly obvious where the interests of third parties may be engaged. To permit such an outcome would be to abuse the Court process ...
[16]
Cobalt argues that Alcon's conduct in filing a Notice of Discontinuance and subsequently failing to advise Justice Barnes that the matter had not settled, when it became apparent that Apotex was resisting consummating the settlement, merits an award of solicitor-client or elevated costs because Alcon's conduct resulted in Cobalt's being required to incur substantial costs, which were wholly unnecessary. Cobalt asserts in this regard that Justice Barnes' Decision necessarily required that Alcon discontinue the prohibition application against Cobalt in Court File T-505-12 as the same issues as were decided by Justice Barnes arose in the application against Cobalt and it would have been an abuse of process for Alcon to re-litigate these issues (relying in this regard on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Sanofi-Aventis
]).
[17]
Alcon, on the other hand, asserts that costs in respect of this matter should only be awarded based on the mid-point of Column III of Tariff B, making five arguments in support of its position. It first argues that Cobalt knew about the withdrawn decision in April 2012 but neglected to take any action to have it reinstated until October 2013, thereby prolonging the pursuit of the application in respect of the NOC for the 0.1% olopatadine product. Second, Alcon asserts that it acted in good faith in seeking to uphold the settlement agreement and that, at least until the release of Justice Mesbur's decision, there is no basis for an elevated costs award. Third, it argues that even after Justice Mesbur's determination, its conduct was reasonable as there is no precedent for dealing with a situation of this nature and it was therefore not clear that it needed to discontinue the application against Cobalt or to advise the Court as to what had transpired in the Ontario application. Fourth, Alcon argues that the case law relied on by Cobalt in support of an elevated cost award is distinguishable and involved much more objectionable conduct, like the deliberate repeated disregard of a plaintiff's trade-mark rights and past court judgments (in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Louis Vuitton
]) or deliberate and unnecessary attempts to re-litigate the same issues against the same party (in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). Finally, Alcon asserts that it would not have been an abuse of process for it to re-litigate the validity of the 094 Patent in the application to prohibit the Minister from issuing an NOC to Cobalt for the 0.1% olopatadine solution, intimating that there was no allegation at issue in the Apotex application that was also present in the application it brought in respect of Cobalt.
[18]
I disagree with the final assertion and find that it would have been an abuse of process for Alcon to have litigated its application against Cobalt in respect of the 094 Patent after Justice Barnes' Decision was reinstated because the same issue
was
raised by Cobalt. As noted, Justice Barnes dismissed the prohibition application against Apotex because he found that the 094 Patent failed on the ground of obviousness. Very similar allegations regarding obviousness were made by Cobalt in Court File T-505-12. Thus, the decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Aventis
is dispositive; it provides that it is an abuse of process, within the meaning of paragraph 6(5)(b) of the
NOC Regulations
, for an innovator company to re-litigate the same allegations that were ruled upon in a previous prohibition application involving a different generic company, even if the allegations are differently worded in the Notices of Allegation in the two files or if the innovator company seeks to call different evidence in the second file.
[19]
The case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], relied on by Alcon to substantiate a different conclusion, does not assist it as that case involved a situation completely different from the present. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , what was at issue was whether a generic company had infringed an innovator's use-based patent. In a previous case, the Court had struck a similar claim of infringement brought against another generic company. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Prothonotary Tabib held that the situation was distinguishable from that  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Aventis
(and that there was no re-litigation of an issue so as to constitute an abuse of process within the meaning of paragraph 6(5)(b) of the
NOC Regulations
) because what was at issue in the two cases was different - namely whether the conduct of two different generic companies constituted infringement. In
Sanofi-Aventis
, on the other hand, what was at issue in the two cases was the validity of the patent for failure to soundly predict utility. That issue was the same in both cases and arose directly from the patent, itself.
[20]
For the reasons already noted, the present case and the previous ruling made by Justice Barnes on the obviousness of the 094 Patent involve the same allegation, and, therefore, the holding  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Aventis
applies such that it would have been an abuse of process for Alcon to re-litigate the validity of the 094 Patent against Cobalt. Indeed, as Cobalt aptly notes, this is eloquently demonstrated by the fact that Alcon discontinued its application against Cobalt the day after Justice Barnes' Decision was reinstated.
[21]
As for the other grounds advanced by Alcon, contrary to what it claims, I do not believe that it behaved reasonably throughout. Rather, I concur with Justice Barnes that, especially once Justice Mesbur determined that Alcon had no agreement with Apotex to settle the prohibition application involving Apotex, it was incumbent on Alcon (and, indeed, Apotex) to so advise this Court to afford Justice Barnes the opportunity to re-instate his Decision. The failure to do so did affect third parties, including Cobalt. Cobalt was required to continue in its preparation of its defence in respect of the prohibition application in Court File T-505-12 (and to advance the arguments related to the 094 Patent in Court File T-504-12). In addition, Cobalt's generic version of the 0.1% olopatadine eye drop was kept off the market for approximately six additional months, thereby possibly causing Cobalt losses and possibly depriving members of the Canadian public of its product over this period.
[22]
I also disagree with Alcon that Cobalt was dilatory in raising the status of the withdrawn Decision. It did not know of the outcome reached until July 2013, when Justice Mesbur issued her decision in the Ontario proceeding. Without knowing this, there was no basis for Cobalt to have sought to have Justice Barnes' Decision reinstated since a decision granting the application would not necessarily have been binding against Cobalt (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Moreover, as concerns the three months between when Cobalt learned of Justice Mesbur's decision and the date it filed its application to have Justice Barnes' Decision reinstated, I do not view any delay on Cobalt's part as unreasonable for two reasons. First, and most importantly, as Justice Barnes determined, the primary onus to correct the record before this Court lay with Alcon and Apotex, not Cobalt. Secondly, Apotex, itself, had raised the issue of the status of the withdrawn Decision with the Court as early as August 2013, so any delay by Cobalt to also raise the issue is not material.
[23]
In the circumstances, I find that an award of solicitor-client costs for a portion of the time that Cobalt seeks them is warranted. Solicitor-client costs are very much the exception and should only be awarded when one party engages in conduct that deserves sanction, which has often been described as conduct that is "reprehensible, scandalous or outrageous" (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Here, I find that Alcon's conduct in seeking to avoid the impact of Justice Barnes' Decision, after it became clear there was no settlement, and in continuing its application against Cobalt until the eleventh hour in circumstances where it was clear that the withdrawn Decision would render its conduct an abuse of process, is so serious that it warrants imposition of costs on the solicitor-client scale. Its conduct in this regard is analogous to that of the unsuccessful parties in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  them. Just as an award of solicitor-client costs was appropriate in those cases, it is appropriate here, because just like the unsuccessful parties in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  I am not persuaded that an award of solicitor-client costs for the entire period Cobalt seeks them is warranted. I believe that there is merit  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's position that its conduct prior to July 2013 was reasonable as it sought to enforce the settlement it believed it had reached, and, indeed, it was Apotex - and not Alcon - which backed away from the agreement in principle the two had reached once it learned that Justice Barnes had dismissed the prohibition application in the withdrawn Decision. It was not until Justice Mesbur decided that there was no settlement that Alcon's conduct became so objectionable that an award on a solicitor-client basis is warranted.
[25]
Thus, Cobalt is entitled to solicitor-client costs in this matter only from July 23, 2013 (the day after Justice Mesbur's decision) to December 4, 2013 (the day Alcon discontinued Court File T-505-12), inclusive. The costs so awarded include all actual fess paid or payable by Cobalt for work done within this period, including the full amount of disbursements incurred in this period.
[26]
For the period before July 23, 2013 and after December 4, 2013 - and in respect of the preparation of its costs submissions - Cobalt is entitled only to costs on the scale normally applicable in applications of this nature. While there is some divergence in the case law in terms of what that scale is, there are several cases which support its being set at the mid-point of Column IV of Tariff B to the Rules, and for providing for the attendance of two counsel at the hearing (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). I find that setting fees on this basis for all periods before July 23, 2013 and after December 4, 2013 is reasonable given the scope of the issues at play in this file. I also find that Cobalt is entitled to its reasonable disbursements, which for these periods would include (if applicable) business class travel on trans-Atlantic flights for one counsel to attend cross-examinations, as awarded in previous cases (see e.g. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 112;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[27]
I find it is appropriate that all work done by Cobalt on the 094 Patent should be attributed to Court File T-505-12 (and correspondingly that the only costs associated with Court File T-504-12 are those incurred in relation to the 924 Patent). This is because regardless of whether Cobalt's work on the 094 Patent applied to one file or the other, it was nonetheless work that Cobalt only had to do because of Alcon's attempt to re-litigate the validity of the 094 Patent. At the same time, Cobalt is not entitled to double recovery for the same work done in relation to two separate files. Indeed, Cobalt in their costs submissions for Court File T-504-12 has not included any claims with respect to the 094 Patent.
[28]
Some of Cobalt's work clearly related only to either the 094 Patent or the 924 Patent. Work relating to the testimony of doctors Lightman, Stephan, Yanni, Lieberman and Irani applied only to the 094 Patent. Work relating to the testimony of Dr. Laskar related only to the 924 Patent.
[29]
In many other instances, however, it appears that Cobalt's delineation of work between the two patents is not so clear. Cobalt's affiant, John Lucas, deposes at para 7 of his affidavit that he was advised that with respect to the evidence of Dr. Bodmeier, 10% related to the 094 Patent and 90% to the 924 Patent, with a like breakdown for disbursements. Further, for a significant portion of Cobalt's work, Mr. Lucas deposes that the timekeeping descriptors were "not clear enough to discern the specific patent to which it related", and so he apportioned 50% to the 094 Patent and 50% to the 924 Patent (at para 10 of his affidavit). While it is regrettable that Cobalt did not track its time on these files with greater precision, the 10/90 split for work related to Dr. Bodmeier and the 50/50 split for the unclear descriptors appear to be reasonable.
[30]
It would have been preferable had I been able to quantify a lump sum costs award to give effect to the foregoing determinations, but, unfortunately, the materials filed by Cobalt in support of its costs claim do not allow me to do so. As Alcon correctly notes in its submissions, only fragmentary information has been provided in respect of the disbursements claimed as no invoices were produced and there is no substantiation for the basis of some of the items that are claimed. Nor is there any affidavit attesting to their reasonableness as is normally required under Tariff B to the Rules, section 1(4). In addition, there is confusion in the time dockets that were filed by Cobalt, and claims were made for time that is already the subject of Justice Barnes' cost award made in the context of the motion to reinstate his withdrawn Decision. Cobalt is not entitled to double-recovery for these amounts. Finally, the materials filed do not allow for the calculation of fees split between those to be calculated on a solicitor-client recovery basis and those to be assessed at the mid-point of Column IV to the Rules. Thus, I have refrained from making a lump sum award in this matter and instead remit its calculation to the parties. I would hope that with the assistance of these Reasons they should be able to settle the matter themselves. If not, the final determination of the amounts payable by Alcon to Cobalt in respect of Court File T-505-12 may be referred to an assessment officer.
II. Court File T-504-12
[31]
The issues in respect of costs in this file are much more straight-forward as Cobalt seeks party-and-party costs, and Alcon agrees that it is bound to pay the same but differs as to the basis for their calculation. It also disputes that a lump sum should be awarded, noting that the time claimed for certain items is excessive and that the substantial amount claimed for disbursements is not properly substantiated.
[32]
For the same reasons as in Court File T-505-12, I have decided that costs should be awarded at the mid-point of Colum IV of Tariff B to the Rules, that Cobalt is entitled to compensation for two counsel at the hearing, and that reasonable disbursements include business class airfare for trans-Atlantic flights to attend cross-examinations for one counsel. However, as Cobalt has failed to file evidence to support the reasonableness of its disbursement claim, I decline to make a lump sum award, as Justice Snider declined to do for much the same reasons in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[33]
As discussed above, only work in relation to the 924 Patent is to be considered for costs purposes as work done in respect of Court File T-504-12. Where it is not completely clear whether the work done was related to the 094 Patent or the 924 Patent, the parties shall attempt to agree between themselves as to the proper apportionment. As noted, the 90% apportionment of work relating to Dr. Bodmeier's testimony to the 924 Patent and the 50% apportionment for work with unclear descriptors seems to be reasonable. Once again, I trust that with the guidance of these Reasons the parties should be able to settle the quantum of costs payable in this file, but should they be unable to do so, they may refer the issue to an assessment officer.
[34]
Finally, I have considered Alcon's suggestion that Cobalt's reply submissions constitute improper case-splitting and determined that, with one exception, they do not. The one exception is Cobalt's request to be allowed to file additional materials to address gaps in its original submission. I am not prepared to allow this as it would amount to case-splitting and would lead to another protracted round of submissions. To the extent Cobalt needs to put forth additional materials, it may do so before the assessment officer. However, I reiterate my hope that the parties ought to be able to agree on the costs payable now that the parameters have been established in these Reasons.
ORDER
[35]
THIS COURT ORDERS that
:
1. For Court File T-505-12, Alcon shall pay to Cobalt:
a. Costs at the mid-point of Column IV of Tariff B to the Rules for reasonable fees and disbursements incurred prior to July 23, 2013;
b. Solicitor-client costs for actual fees and disbursements incurred from July 23, 2013 to December 4, 2013, inclusive; and
c. Costs at the mid-point of Column IV of Tariff B to the Rules for reasonable fees and disbursements incurred after December 4, 2013.
2. For Court File T-504-12, Alcon shall pay to Cobalt costs at the mid-point of Column IV of Tariff B for reasonable fees and disbursements.
3. The following applies to both files in respect of costs assessed at the mid-point of Column IV:
a. Reasonable fees shall include a second counsel for attendance at the hearing;
b. Expert fees are awarded but may not exceed fees of senior counsel for like time involvement;
c. Fees or disbursements for attending or defending cross-examinations shall be limited to one counsel, including for costs of travel; and
d. If applicable, business class airfare is reasonable, but only for trans-Atlantic flights.
4. The parties shall attempt to agree on quantum of costs for Court Files T-505-12 and T-504-12 based on these Reasons. Should the parties be unable to agree, they may refer this matter to an assessment officer.
.........................
Alcon Canada Inc., Alcon Research Ltd., Alcon Pharmaceuticals, Ltd. et  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Ltd., et  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Les demanderesses [appelées collectivement « Alcon » dans les présents motifs] ont introduit deux demandes visant à faire interdire au ministre de la Santé [le ministre] de délivrer, en vertu du Règlement sur les médicaments brevetés (avis de conformité), DORS/93-133 [le Règlement AC], un avis de conformité à la défenderesse Cobalt Pharmaceuticals Company [Cobalt] pour des gouttes ophtalmiques d'olopatadine à une concentration de 0,1 % et de 0,2 %. La demande relative à la solution à 0,1 % a été présentée dans le dossier T-505-12 et celle relative à la solution à 0,2 % a été soumise dans le dossier T-504-12.
[2]
Les deux demandes devaient être débattues devant moi pendant cinq jours, du 9 au 13 décembre 2013. Le 4 décembre 2013, Alcon s'est désistée de sa demande dans le dossier T-505-12 et a indiqué qu'elle ne se fondait pas sur le brevet canadien no 2195094 [le brevet 094] pour appuyer la demande qu'elle avait présentée dans le dossier T-504-12. Dans le jugement que j'ai prononcé le 14 février 2014 dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  j'ai rejeté la demande d'Alcon visant à faire interdire au ministre de la Santé de délivrer un avis de conformité à Cobalt pour ses gouttes ophtalmiques d'olopatadine à 0,2 % et j'ai invité Alcon et Cobalt à soumettre leurs observations au sujet du montant des dépens à adjuger en rapport avec les deux instances.
[3]
Les présents motifs portent sur les dépens à adjuger dans les deux dossiers.
I. Dossier T-505-12
[4]
L'avis de demande a été déposé dans ce dossier le 8 mars 2012 et, comme nous l'avons signalé, Alcon s'est désistée de sa demande à peine cinq jours avant la date à laquelle elle devait être entendue.
[5]
Cobalt sollicite dans ce dossier des dépens avocat-client de 430 000 $ payables immédiatement, ce qui représente selon elle les frais qu'elle a effectivement engagés dans la présente affaire entre le 12 avril 2012 et le 4 décembre 2013, ainsi qu'aux honoraires qu'elle estime avoir à payer en ce qui concerne les observations formulées au sujet des dépens. À titre subsidiaire, Cobalt réclame un montant forfaitaire de 200 000 $ aussi payable immédiatement, correspondant à l'échelon supérieur de la colonne V du tarif B des
Règles des Cours fédérales
, DORS/98-106 [les Règles]. Elle soutient que la conduite d'Alcon mérite d'être sanctionnée et qu'Alcon mérite d'être condamnée soit aux dépens avocat-client, soit à des dépens majorés.
[6]
Les prétentions de Cobalt à cet égard concernent principalement ce qui s'est produit lors du déroulement de l'instance antérieure [le dossier T-564-10] portant sur la demande d'interdiction présentée par Alcon contre Apotex Inc.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  en rapport avec le brevet 094 relatif aux gouttes ophtalmiques d'olopatadine à 0,1% d'Apotex. Cette demande a été instruite par mon collègue, le juge Barnes, qui a mis sa décision sur le fond en délibéré. À l'issue de l'audience, Alcon et Apotex ont conjointement demandé que la décision ne soit pas rendue, étant donné qu'elles étaient en pourparlers en vue de régler l'affaire. De consentement, l'avocat d'Alcon a écrit à la Cour le 30 mars 2012 pour demander au juge Barnes d'attendre au 12 avril 2012, veille de la date d'expiration du sursis prévu par la loi, avant de rendre sa décision. Toutefois, la lettre du 30 mars 2012 de l'avocat n'a pas été portée à l'attention du juge Barnes et celui-ci a rendu sa décision dans le dossier T-564-10 le 11 avril 2012 [le juge Barnes]. Dans cette décision, le juge Barnes rejetait la demande d'interdiction d'Alcon et concluait que le brevet 094 était invalide pour cause d'évidence.
[7]
Presque immédiatement après, l'avocat d'Alcon a écrit à l'avocat d'Apotex pour l'informer qu'il avait reçu instruction de sa cliente de demander à la Cour:
[traduction] [...] que, si possible, le jugement de la Cour soit rétracté, parce que: i) les parties avaient demandé qu'il ne soit pas rendu d'ici au 12 avril un règlement étant imminent; (ii) les parties sont depuis parvenues à un accord sur tous les points essentiels et étaient sur le point de demander aujourd'hui à la Cour de proroger la période prévue par la loi d'un mois pour leur permettre de rédiger un accord formel.
[8]
Il ressort de la décision rendue par la juge Mesbur dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  sur laquelle nous reviendrons plus loin, que l'avocat d'Apotex a reçu instruction d'accepter cette proposition, et qu'il a téléphoné au greffe de notre Cour le 11 avril pour lui communiquer le message sur lequel l'avocat d'Alcon et lui-même s'étaient entendus. Toutefois, il semble que le greffe ait dit au juge Barnes qu'Alcon et Apotex demandaient que son jugement soit rétracté parce qu'elles étaient parvenues à un règlement. Par conséquent, le 12 avril 2013, le juge Barnes a donné la directive suivante:
[traduction] Après avoir été informée par les parties qu'un règlement complet du présent litige a été négocié par les parties au même moment où la Cour rendait son jugement, la Cour retire par conséquent son jugement, avec le consentement des parties.
[9]
Le lendemain, Alcon a déposé un avis de désistement devant la Cour dans la demande d'interdiction portant sur les solutions contenant de l'olopatadine à 0,1 %.
[10]
Par la suite, Alcon et Apotex ont poursuivi leurs pourparlers, mais n'ont pas réussi à s'entendre sur des documents définitifs de règlement du litige. En octobre 2012, Alcon a saisi la Cour supérieure de justice de l'Ontario d'une demande visant à faire exécuter l'entente qu'elle soutenait avoir conclue avec Apotex.
[11]
Le 22 juillet 2013, la juge Mesbur a rendu sa décision en réponse à la demande présentée par Alcon en vue de faire exécuter le règlement. Elle a conclu qu'aucune entente n'était intervenue, étant donné que, lors de leurs négociations, les deux parties s'étaient entendues pour dire que toute entente à laquelle elles parviendraient ne serait que provisoire et devait être entérinée par leurs dirigeants respectifs. Comme cette approbation n'avait pas été donnée par Apotex (après avoir été mise au courant de la décision du juge Barnes), la juge Mesbur a estimé que la demande d'interdiction présentée au sujet du produit d'Apotex à base d'olopatadine à 0,1 % n'avait pas été réglée. Alcon n'a pas interjeté appel de la décision de la juge Mesbur.
[12]
En août 2013, Apotex a écrit à notre Cour une lettre dans laquelle elle tentait d'invoquer la décision rendue par le juge Barnes en rapport avec une autre instance l'opposant à Alcon et portant sur de l'olopatadine dans laquelle Alcon se fondait en partie sur le brevet 094. Compte tenu des communications ultérieures échangées entre elle et Alcon, Apotex soutenait que la décision que la Cour avait retirée devait être rétablie. Alcon n'était pas de cet avis. Apotex a finalement décidé de ne pas donner suite à sa demande de rétablissement de la décision du juge Barnes.
[13]
En octobre 2013, Cobalt a écrit à notre Cour pour demander elle aussi le rétablissement de la décision du juge Barnes. Dans sa lettre du 22 octobre adressée à la Cour, l'avocat de Cobalt expliquait que sa cliente avait été mise au courant de la teneur de la décision qui a été retirée lorsque la juge Mesbur a rendu sa décision en juillet 2013. Il ressort toutefois des pièces déposées par Cobalt à l'appui de sa demande de dépens dans la présente affaire que l'avocat de Cobalt avait examinée, en avril 2012, les inscriptions consignées dans le dossier de notre Cour en rapport avec la demande d'interdiction concernant Alcon et Apotex. Or, il appert de celles-ci qu'un jugement a été rendu le 11 avril 2012 et a été retiré de consentement le lendemain à la suite d'une entente intervenue entre les parties. Toutefois, il n'était pas fait mention du résultat auquel était parvenu le juge dans le jugement ayant été retiré. Ainsi, en avril 2012, Cobalt avait été informée uniquement du fait que le juge Barnes avait retiré sa décision, mais n'avait été mis au courant qu'en juillet 2013 du résultat auquel le juge Barnes était parvenu.
[14]
Le 3 décembre 2013, le juge Barnes a présidé une audience au cours de laquelle il a examiné la demande présentée par Cobalt en vue de faire rétablir sa décision et contestée par Alcon.
[15]
Le juge Barnes a rendu à l'audience une décision faisant droit à la requête de Cobalt. Il a déclaré que sa décision prenait effet rétroactivement au 11 avril 2012 et il a condamné Alcon à payer à Cobalt des dépens fixés à 10 000 $ relativement à la requête en rétablissement. Dans sa décision, le juge Barnes a critiqué la conduite d'Alcon (et d'Apotex), déclarant, à la page 5 de son ordonnance qu'il était:
[traduction] en désaccord avec l'argument d'Alcon suivant lequel le dépôt de l'avis de désistement avait eu pour effet de priver la Cour de compétence pour accorder une réparation. Il n'est pas loisible à une partie d'obtenir une ordonnance sur la foi d'un problème de communication ou de la mauvaise compréhension par la Cour de la situation et d'ensuite préserver la validité de l'ordonnance en se désistant de façon unilatérale de la procédure. Cela va particulièrement de soi lorsque les intérêts de tiers peuvent être en cause. Permettre un tel résultat serait un abus de procédure [...]
[16]
Suivant Cobalt, le fait qu'Alcon ait déposé un avis de désistement et ensuite fait défaut d'informer le juge Barnes que l'affaire n'avait pas été réglée lorsqu'il est devenu évident qu'Apotex refusait de parachever l'entente de règlement justifie l'octroi de dépens avocat-client ou de dépens majorés parce que, en raison des agissements d'Alcon, Cobalt a dû engager des frais importants, parfaitement inutiles. Cobalt affirme à cet égard que la décision du juge Barnes obligeait Alcon à se désister de sa demande d'interdiction contre Cobalt dans le dossier T-505-12, étant donné que les mêmes questions avaient déjà été tranchées par le juge Barnes dans la demande introduite contre Cobalt et qu'Alcon se serait rendue coupable d'un abus de procédure en plaidant de nouveau les mêmes questions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Sanofi-Aventis
] ).
[17]
Alcon, en revanche, affirme que les dépens de la présente affaire devraient être taxés selon l'échelon médian de la colonne III du tarif B. Elle invoque cinq arguments à l'appui de sa position. Elle soutient tout d'abord que Cobalt était au courant en avril 2012 du retrait de la décision du juge Barnes, mais qu'elle a attendu jusqu'en octobre 2013 pour faire rétablir cette décision, ce qui a prolongé d'autant la demande portant sur l'avis de conformité relatif au produit à base d'olopatadine à 0,1 %. Deuxièmement, Alcon affirme qu'elle a agi de bonne foi en cherchant à faire en sorte que l'entente de règlement soit maintenue et que, à tout le moins pour la période précédant la date à laquelle la juge Mesbur a rendu sa décision, rien ne justifie l'adjudication de dépens majorés. Troisièmement, elle soutient que, même après la décision de la juge Mesbur, elle a agi de façon raisonnable, si l'on tient compte du fait qu'il n'existe aucun précédent sur la façon de se comporter en pareil cas et qu'il n'était donc pas évident qu'elle devait se désister de sa demande contre Cobalt ou informer la Cour de ce qui s'était produit dans l'instance ontarienne. Quatrièmement, Alcon soutient que la jurisprudence invoquée par Cobalt pour justifier une condamnation à des dépens majorés concerne des situations différentes et a trait à des actes beaucoup plus répréhensibles, par exemple le mépris constant et délibéré des droits que confère une marque de commerce à une demanderesse et de la jurisprudence antérieure (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Louis Vuitton
] ) ou encore des tentatives délibérées et inutiles de plaider de nouveau les mêmes questions contre la même partie (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] ). Enfin, Alcon a affirmé qu'elle n'aurait pas commis un abus de procédure en plaidant de nouveau la validité du brevet 094 dans le cadre de la demande visant à faire interdire au ministre de délivrer un avis de conformité à Cobalt pour sa solution d'olopatadine à 1,0 %, laissant entendre qu'on ne retrouve dans la demande visant Cobalt aucune des allégations en litige dans la demande présentée par Apotex.
[18]
Je ne suis pas d'accord avec cette dernière affirmation et j'estime qu'Alcon aurait commis un abus de procédure si elle avait maintenu sa demande contre Cobalt relativement au brevet 094 après que la décision du juge Barnes eut été rétablie parce que la même question
était
soulevée par Cobalt. Comme je l'ai déjà fait observer, le juge Barnes a rejeté la demande d'interdiction présentée contre Apotex parce qu'il estimait que le brevet 094 était invalide pour cause d'évidence. Cobalt a formulé des allégations très similaires au sujet de l'évidence dans le dossier T-505-12. Ainsi, le jugement
Sanofi-Aventis
tranche le débat: il prévoit que constitue un abus de procédure, au sens de l'alinéa 6(5)
b
) du Règlement, le fait pour un innovateur de tenter de soulever de nouveau les mêmes allégations que celles qui ont déjà été tranchées dans le cadre d'une demande d'interdiction antérieure à laquelle était partie un autre fabricant de médicaments génériques, et ce, même si les allégations sont formulées différemment dans les avis d'allégation déposés dans les deux dossiers, ou même si l'innovateur tente de produire des éléments de preuve différents dans le second dossier.
[19]
La décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], sur laquelle Alcon se fonde pour justifier une conclusion différente, ne lui est d'aucun secours, étant donné que cette affaire portait sur une situation complètement différente de celle qui nous occupe en l'espèce. Dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le débat portait sur la question de savoir si un fabricant de médicaments génériques avait contrefait le brevet d'un innovateur fondé sur l'usage. Dans une affaire antérieure, la Cour avait rejeté une poursuite en contrefaçon similaire présentée contre un autre fabricant de médicaments génériques. Dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la protonotaire Tabib a estimé qu'il convenait d'établir une distinction entre la situation qui était soumise à son examen et celle en cause dans l'affaire
Sanofi-Aventis
(ajoutant qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une tentative visant à saisir à nouveau la Cour d'une question déjà tranchée, ce qui constituerait un abus de procédure au sens de l'alinéa 6(5)
b
) du Règlement), parce que dans les deux affaires en question le litige portait sur des situations différentes en ce qu'il s'agissait de déterminer si les actes de deux fabricants de médicaments génériques différents constituaient de la contrefaçon. Dans l'affaire
Sanofi-Aventis
, en revanche, les deux affaires en cause portaient sur la validité du brevet pour défaut de prédire valablement son utilité. La question en litige était identique dans les deux cas, et découlait directement du brevet lui-même.
[20]
Pour les motifs que j'ai déjà exposés, la présente affaire et la décision déjà rendue par le juge Barnes au sujet de l'évidence du brevet 094 concernent toutes les deux la même allégation et, par conséquent, la décision
Sanofi-Aventis
s'applique, de sorte qu'Alcon aurait commis un abus de procédure en soulevant de nouveau la question de la validité du brevet 094 contre Cobalt. D'ailleurs, ainsi que Cobalt le signale à juste titre, le fait qu'Alcon se soit désistée de sa demande contre elle le lendemain de la date à laquelle le jugement du juge Barnes a été rétabli le démontre de façon éloquente.
[21]
Quant aux autres moyens invoqués par Alcon, contrairement à ce qu'elle prétend, je ne crois pas qu'elle a agi de façon raisonnable tout au long de la procédure. J'abonde plutôt dans le sens du juge Barnes, suivant lequel, surtout après que la juge Mesbur eut décidé qu'il n'y avait pas, entre Alcon et Apotex, d'entente de règlement de la demande d'interdiction à laquelle Apotex était partie, il incombait à Alcon - et d'ailleurs à Apotex - d'informer notre Cour de cette décision pour donner la possibilité au juge Barnes de rétablir sa décision. L'omission de le faire a eu des incidences sur des tiers, et notamment sur Cobalt. Cobalt devait poursuivre la préparation de sa défense en réponse à la demande d'interdiction dans le dossier T-505-12 (et de faire valoir ses arguments au sujet du brevet 094 dans le dossier T-504-12). De plus, la version générique des gouttes ophtalmiques d'olopatadine à 0,1 % de Cobalt a été tenue à l'écart du marché pendant environ six autres mois, ce qui a probablement causé à Cobalt des pertes et peut-être privé une partie de la population canadienne de son produit pendant cette période.
[22]
Je ne suis par ailleurs pas d'accord avec Alcon lorsqu'elle avance que Cobalt n'a pas fait preuve de diligence et a tardé à soulever la question du « statut » de la décision qui avait été retirée. Elle n'a été mise au courant de cette décision qu'en juillet 2013, lorsque la juge Mesbur a rendu sa décision dans l'instance ontarienne. Ignorant ce fait, Cobalt n'avait aucune raison de demander le rétablissement de la décision du juge Barnes, étant donné qu'une décision faisant droit à la demande n'aurait pas nécessairement été opposable à  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). De plus, pour ce qui est des trois mois qui se sont écoulés entre le moment où Cobalt a été mise au courant de la décision de la juge Mesbur et la date à laquelle elle a déposé sa demande visant à faire rétablir la décision du juge Barnes, je n'estime pas que Cobalt a tardé de façon déraisonnable à agir, et ce, pour deux raisons. En premier lieu et surtout, comme le juge Barnes l'a décidé, c'est d'abord et avant tout à Alcon et à Apotex qu'il incombait de corriger le dossier devant notre Cour et non à Cobalt. En second lieu, Apotex avait elle-même soulevé la question du « statut » de la décision retirée en s'adressant à la Cour dès août 2013, de sorte que le temps que Cobalt a mis à soulever la question ne portait pas à conséquence.
[23]
Dans ces conditions, j'estime qu'il est justifié d'accorder des dépens avocat-client pour une partie de la période pour laquelle Cobalt les sollicite. Les dépens avocat-client ne doivent être accordés que dans des circonstances exceptionnelles et seulement lorsqu'une partie se livre à des agissements qui méritent une sanction, c'est-à-dire, lorsqu'elle adopte une conduite qui a souvent qualifiée de « répréhensible, scandaleuse ou outrageante » (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Dans le cas qui nous occupe, j'estime que la conduite adoptée par Alcon pour chercher à se soustraire aux conséquences de la décision du juge Barnes après qu'il soit devenu évident qu'il n'y avait pas d'entente de règlement, et en donnant suite à sa demande contre Cobalt jusqu'à la toute dernière minute alors qu'il était clair que la décision retirée ferait en sorte que sa conduite serait considérée comme un abus de procédure, est grave au point de justifier qu'elle soit condamnée à verser des dépens avocat-client. Sa conduite à cet égard est analogue à celle des parties ayant succombé dans les affaires
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  de plaider à nouveau les questions en litige. Tout comme une adjudication de dépens avocat-client convenait dans ces affaires, cette mesure est appropriée en l'espèce parce que, tout comme les parties n'ayant pas eu gain de cause dans les affaires
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  je ne suis pas convaincue que l'adjudication de dépens avocat-client pour toute la période pour laquelle Cobalt les réclame soit justifiée. Je crois qu'Alcon n'a pas tort d'affirmer qu'elle a agi de façon raisonnable avant juillet 2003 alors qu'elle cherchait à faire exécuter le règlement qu'elle croyait avoir conclu, et ce, d'autant plus que c'est Apotex - et non Alcon - qui est revenue sur l'entente de principe qu'elle et Apotex avaient conclue après avoir appris que le juge Barnes avait rejeté la demande d'interdiction dans le jugement qui a été par la suite retiré. Ce n'est que lorsque la juge Mesbur a conclu à l'absence de règlement, que la conduite d'Alcon est devenue répréhensible au point de justifier l'adjudication de dépens avocat-client.
[25]
Cobalt a donc droit aux dépens avocat-client dans la présente affaire seulement pour la période comprise entre le 23 juillet 2013 (lendemain de la date de la décision de la juge Mesbur) et le 4 décembre 2013 (date à laquelle Alcon s'est désistée de sa demande dans le dossier T-505-12), inclusivement. Les dépens ainsi adjugés comprennent tous les honoraires effectivement payés ou payables par Cobalt pour le travail effectué au cours de cette période, y compris le montant intégral des débours qu'elle a engagés au cours de cette période.
[26]
Pour la période précédant le 23 juillet 2013 et celle suivant le 4 décembre 2013 - et en ce qui concerne la préparation de ses arguments au sujet des dépens - Cobalt n'a droit qu'aux dépens prévus au tarif normalement applicable aux demandes de cette nature. Bien que la jurisprudence ne soit pas fixée en ce qui concerne le barème applicable, plusieurs décisions justifient de s'en remettre à l'échelon médian de la colonne 3 du tarif B des Règles et de prendre en compte la présence de deux avocats à l'audience (voir, par ex.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). J'estime raisonnable de fixer les honoraires de cette manière pour toutes les périodes précédant le 23 juillet 2013 et suivant le 4 décembre 2013, compte tenu de l'ampleur des questions en jeu dans le présent dossier. J'estime également que Cobalt a droit à ses débours raisonnables ce qui, pour les périodes en question comprendraient (le cas échéant) le prix d'un billet d'avion en classe affaires pour des vols transatlantiques pour assurer la présence d'un avocat aux contre-interrogatoires, conformément à ce qui a été décidé dans d'autres affaires (voir, par ex., <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 112;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[27]
J'estime qu'il convient d'attribuer au dossier T-505-12 tout le travail effectué par Cobalt relativement au brevet 094 (et donc que les frais associés au dossier T-504-12 ne concernent que ceux qui ont été engagés en ce qui a trait au brevet 224). Cette mesure résulte du fait qu'indépendamment de la question de savoir si le travail qu'a effectué Cobalt en ce qui concerne le brevet 094 concerne l'un ou l'autre dossier, il s'agit néanmoins de travail que Cobalt a dû effectuer en raison de la tentative d'Alcon de plaider de nouveau la question de la validité du brevet 094. Par ailleurs, Cobalt n'a pas droit à une double indemnisation pour le même travail effectué en rapport avec deux dossiers distincts. D'ailleurs, dans les observations qu'elle a soumises au sujet des dépens relatifs au dossier T-504-12, Cobalt n'a rien demandé en ce qui a trait au brevet 094.
[28]
Une partie du travail effectué par Cobalt ne concernait de toute évidence que le brevet 094 ou le brevet 924. Le travail effectué pour préparer le témoignage des Drs Lightman, Stephan, Yanni, Lieberman et Irani ne concernait que le brevet 094. La préparation du témoignage du Dr Laskar ne concernait que le brevet 924.
[29]
Toutefois à plusieurs autres égards, il n'est pas aussi aisé de déterminer si le travail effectué par Cobalt concerne l'un ou l'autre brevet. John Lucas, qui a souscrit à un affidavit au nom de Cobalt, déclare au paragraphe 7 de son affidavit qu'il a été informé que 10 p. 100 du témoignage de M. Bodmeier concernait le brevet 094 et 90 p. 100 de celui-ci le brevet 924, et que les débours connexes se répartissaient de la même façon. De plus, John Lucas a expliqué que les données relatives à la consignation du temps consacré à une partie importante du travail effectué par Cobalt n'étaient [traduction] « pas assez claires pour permettre de savoir à quel brevet le travail se rapportait », de sorte qu'il avait réparti à parts égales entre les brevets 094 et 924 le travail effectué par cette dernière (au paragraphe 10 de son affidavit). Bien qu'il soit regrettable que Cobalt n'ait pas consigné avec plus d'exactitude le travail effectué dans les dossiers en question, le partage à 10/90 p. 100 pour le travail effectué pour préparer le témoignage de M. Bodmeier et à 50/50 pour le temps dont la consignation est imprécise me semble raisonnable.
[30]
Il aurait été préférable que je puisse déterminer le montant global des dépens au vu des conclusions précédentes, mais, malheureusement, les pièces déposées par Cobalt à l'appui de sa demande de dépens ne me permettent pas de le faire. Ainsi qu'Alcon le fait observer à juste titre dans ses arguments, seuls des renseignements fragmentaires ont été soumis au sujet des débours demandés, aucune facture n'ayant été produite et aucune justification n'ayant été présentée à l'égard de certains des éléments visés par la demande. Il n'y a également aucun affidavit attestant le caractère raisonnable des dépenses comme l'exige normalement le paragraphe 1(4) du tarif B des Règles. De plus, on relève des contradictions dans les données inscrites dans les registres du temps consacré au dossier produits par Cobalt et on constate que des montants sont demandés pour du temps ayant fait l'objet d'une adjudication de dépens par le juge Barnes dans sa décision sur la requête visant à faire rétablir sa décision. Cobalt ne peut être indemnisée deux fois pour le même travail. Enfin, les pièces versées au dossier ne permettent pas de répartir les honoraires demandés en fonction des dépens attribués sur la base avocat-client et ceux qui sont attribués selon l'échelon médian de la colonne 3 du tarif B des Règles. Je me suis donc abstenue d'accorder un montant forfaitaire en l'espèce et laisse aux parties le soin de calculer les dépens. J'espère qu'à l'aide des présents motifs, elles seront en mesure de mieux régler la question elles-mêmes. Dans le cas contraire, elles pourront demander à un officier taxateur de procéder au calcul définitif des sommes payables par Alcon à Cobalt pour le dossier T-505-12.
II. Dossier T-504-12
[31]
Les questions relatives aux dépens dans ce dossier sont beaucoup plus simples, étant donné que Cobalt demande que des dépens entre parties lui soient accordés et qu'Alcon convient qu'elle est tenue de les payer; elle diverge toutefois d'opinion quant à la façon de les calculer. Elle n'est pas non plus d'accord pour dire qu'un montant forfaitaire devrait être adjugé, et fait observer que le temps censé avoir été consacré à certaines tâches est excessif et que l'importante somme réclamée pour les débours n'a pas été suffisamment justifiée.
[32]
Pour les mêmes motifs que ceux que j'ai formulés au sujet du dossier T-505-12, j'ai décidé que les dépens devaient être adjugés selon l'échelon médian de la colonne IV du tarif B des Règles, que Cobalt a le droit d'être indemnisée pour la présence de deux avocats à l'audience et qu'il est raisonnable de tenir compte dans le calcul des débours du prix d'un billet d'avion transatlantique en classe affaires pour permettre à un avocat de participer aux contre-interrogatoires. Toutefois, comme Cobalt n'a pas déposé d'éléments de preuve pour démontrer que le montant qu'elle sollicite au titre des débours était raisonnable, je refuse d'accorder un montant forfaitaire, comme la juge Snider a refusé de le faire pour essentiellement les mêmes raisons dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[33]
Comme je l'ai déjà expliqué, seul le travail effectué en rapport avec le brevet 924 doit, aux fins de l'adjudication des dépens, être considéré comme du travail effectué dans le dossier T-504-12. Lorsqu'il est impossible de déterminer avec certitude si le travail concernait le brevet 094 ou le brevet 924, les parties devront tenter de s'entendre sur la répartition. Comme je l'ai déjà signalé, il me semble raisonnable d'attribuer 90 p. 100 du témoignage du Dr Bodmeier au brevet 924 et de répartir à parts égales le temps dont la consignation est imprécise. Là encore, j'espère qu'avec les directives données dans les présents motifs, les parties réussissent à s'entendre sur le montant des dépens payables dans le présent dossier. Toutefois, advenant le cas où elles n'y parviendraient pas, elles pourront s'adresser à un agent taxateur.
[34]
Enfin, pour ce qui est de l'argument d'Alcon suivant lequel les observations présentées en réponse par Cobalt constituent un fractionnement inacceptable du dossier, j'estime qu'à une exception près, ce n'est pas le cas. Cette exception concerne la demande faite par Cobalt en vue d'être autorisée à verser des pièces complémentaires pour combler les lacunes de son mémoire initial. Je ne suis pas disposée à l'autoriser, pour éviter un fractionnement de la cause et parce que cette mesure déclencherait un nouvel échange interminable d'arguments. Dans la mesure où Cobalt estime nécessaire de soumettre d'autres pièces justificatives, elle pourra le faire devant l'agent taxateur. Toutefois, je répète mon souhait que les parties puissent réussir à s'entendre sur le montant des dépens payables, maintenant que j'en ai établi les paramètres dans les présents motifs.
ORDONNANCE
[35]
LA COUR
:
1. Dans le dossier T-505-12, Alcon est condamné à payer à Cobalt:
a. les dépens calculés selon l'échelon médian de la colonne IV du tarif B des Règles pour ce qui est des honoraires et débours raisonnables engagés avant le 23 juillet 2013;
b. les dépens avocat-client, soit les honoraires et débours effectivement engagés au cours de la période du 23 juillet 2013 au 4 décembre 2013 inclusivement;
c. les dépens calculés selon l'échelon médian de la colonne IV du tarif B des Règles en ce qui concerne les frais et débours raisonnables engagés après le 4 décembre 2013.
2. Dans le cas du dossier T-504-12, Alcon est condamnée à payer à Cobalt les dépens calculés selon l'échelon médian de la colonne IV du tarif B, au titre des honoraires et débours raisonnables engagés par Cobalt.
3. Les directives suivantes s'appliquent aux deux dossiers, en ce qui concerne les dépens calculés selon l'échelon médian de la colonne IV:
a. sont inclus dans les honoraires raisonnables les honoraires liés à la présence d'un deuxième avocat à l'audience;
b. les honoraires d'experts sont accordés, mais ceux-ci ne peuvent excéder les honoraires habituels d'un avocat principal pour le même nombre d'heures;
c. les frais ou les débours afférents à la participation à des contre-interrogatoires se limitent à ceux d'un seul avocat et comprennent ses frais de déplacement;
d. le cas échéant, les frais de déplacement en classe affaires sont raisonnables, mais uniquement pour les vols transatlantiques.
4. Les parties devront tenter de s'entendre sur les montants des dépens dans les dossiers T-505-12 et T-504-12 en se fondant sur les présents motifs. Advenant le cas où les parties n'arriveraient pas à s'entendre, elles pourront s'adresser à un officier taxateur.
[End of document]