 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 In The Matter Of: The Immigration Act, 1976 and amendments thereto 
 
 
 
 And In The Matter Of: The Immigration Regulations, 1978, and amendments thereto 
 
 
 
 And In The Matter Of: An application for permanent residence in Canada of Thakorlal Hajariwala 
 
 
 
 And In The Matter Of: The refusal by the respondents to consider and assess the application for permanent residence of Thakorlal Hajariwala pursuant to the said Act and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.J. 
 
 November 9, 1988. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Hajariwala applied for permanent residence in Canada. He indicated that he intended to pursue the occupations of material purchasing officer or garment sales representative, having been the owner/manager of a garment manufacturing and sales company in India. He was interviewed by an immigration officer, but his application for permanent residence was refused, because he was not awarded any units of assessment for experience in the occupation he intended to pursue in Canada. The immigration officer interpreted the Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations as prohibiting him from breaking down Hajariwala's various responsibilities from his job in India into separate components for the purpose of awarding units of assessment for experience in his stated alternate intended occupations. Hajariwala applied for certiorari to quash the immigration officer's decision and for mandamus to compel the processing of his application. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the application to set aside the decision of the immigration officer and ordered the reassessment of Hajariwala's case. The court held that there was no reason why the actual experience and time spent in each of Hajariwala's various job responsibilities could not be broken down to award units of assessment for experience in his stated alternate intended occupations. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1203 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Statutory policy - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that "... Parliament's intention in enacting the Immigration Act is to define Canada's immigration policy both to Canadians and to those who wish to come here from abroad. Such a policy cannot exist without complex regulations, a good many of which appear to be restrictive in nature, but the policy should always be interpreted in positive terms. The purpose of the statute is to permit immigration, not to prevent it. It follows that applicants have the right to frame their application in a way that maximizes their chances for entry. It is the corresponding obligation of immigration officers to provide a thorough and fair assessment, and to provide adequate reasons for refusals when they occur" - See paragraph 4. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1230 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Application for admission - Immigrant visa - Duty of officer - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that "it is clearly, therefore, the responsibility of the applicant [alien] to produce all relevant information which may assist his application. The extent to which immigration officers may wish to offer assistance, counselling or advice may be a matter of individual preference or even a matter of departmental policy from time to time, but it is not an obligation that is imposed upon the officers by the [Immigration] Act or the Regulations" - See paragraph 7. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1230 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Application for admission - Immigrant visa - Duty of officer - Re occupation of alien - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that a visa officer, when considering an alien for permanent residence, should consider, inter alia, alternate occupations, where the alien has designated alternate occupations in his application - See paragraph 6. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1233 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Application for admission - Immigrant visa - Units of assessment - Occupations - An alien applied for permanent residence stating that he intended to pursue the alternate occupations of material purchasing officer or garment sales representative - His application was refused, because the immigration official who dealt with the application, did not award any units of assessment for experience in the occupations the alien intended to pursue - The officer stated that the alien's experience and various responsibilities in his foreign job could not be broken down into separate components for the purpose of awarding units of assessment for experience in the alternate intended occupations - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that the immigration officer breached his duty of fairness in reaching this conclusion and committed an error of law - The court held that there was no reason why the actual experience and time spent in each of the alien's various job responsibilities could not be broken down to award units of assessment for experience in intended alternate occupations. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1233 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Application for admission - Immigrant visa - Units of assessment - Occupations - [See first Aliens - Topic 1230 above]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration Act, S.C. 1976-77, c. 52, sect. 6 [paras. 6, 7]; sect. 6(1) [para. 3]. 
 
 Immigration Act Regulations, Immigration Regulations, sect. 8(1)(a), sect. 8(2), sect. 9(1), sect. 11(1) [para. 13]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 C. Rotenberg and D. Smith, for the applicant; 
 
 C. Brenzall, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Rotenberg and Martinello, for the applicant; 
 
 Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard in Toronto, Ontario, on July 11 and 12, 1988, before Jerome, A.C.J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on November 9, 1988: 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Jerome, A.C.J. 
 : This case was heard together with T-625-88, T-719-88, T-1133-88, T-1157-88 and T-1158-88. These matters came on for hearing in Toronto, Ontario, on July 11 and 12, 1988 and on September 8, 1988. The applications are all for orders by way of certiorari, quashing the decision of the respondents refusing the applicants' request for permanent residence in Canada and for a writ of mandamus directing that: 
 
 
 
 1) The respondents consider and process the applicants' request for permanent residence in Canada in accordance with the Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations. 
 
 
 
 2) The respondents determine in accordance with the law, whether it would be contrary to the said Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations to grant landing to the applicants. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The initial applications in these cases were made in different locations, and they call into question assessments made by a number of visa officers. However, all parties are represented by the same counsel, and with the cooperation of counsel for the respondents, they have been dealt with as a group since they involve a common issue, that of the included occupation. In more formal terms, the question to be decided here is, what is required of the visa officer as a matter of law under the Act and Regulations, and as a matter of fairness in cases where the applicant claims both qualification and experience in more than one occupation? 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Each applicant has applied for permanent residence in Canada as an independent candidate pursuant to s. 6(1) of the Immigration Act. Such applications involve a two-stage assessment process during which it is the visa officer's duty to apply criteria set forth in the legislation and award points based on the ability of the applicant to become successfully established in Canada. The criteria for successful establishment include age, education, occupational demand and experience, language and personal suitability. The first phase of the assessment is a paper screening process in which immigration officials evaluate documents submitted by applicants and decide if the application process should be continued. If the applicant passes this phase, he is invited to an interview with a visa officer. Obviously, one of the most significant factors in any assessment is the applicant's possibility of employment in Canada. Points are therefore awarded both for occupational demand in the paper screening step, and for experience in the final assessment. The process also requires recourse to the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (C.C.D.O.), a seven volume manual which classifies and describes thousands of occupations. Assessment of any one intended occupation begins with a matching of the applicant's work routine with a specific occupation from the C.C.D.O. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Before dealing with the specifics of this case, some general comments are appropriate. Above all, it is important to bear in mind that Parliament's intention in enacting the Immigration Act is to define Canada's immigration policy both to Canadians and to those who wish to come here from abroad. Such a policy cannot exist without complex regulations, a good many of which appear to be restrictive in nature, but the policy should always be interpreted in positive terms. The purpose of the statute is to permit immigration, not prevent it. It follows that applicants have the right to frame their application in a way that maximizes their chances for entry. It is the corresponding obligation of immigration officers to provide a thorough and fair assessment, and to provide adequate reasons for refusals when they occur. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  As a further expression of general principle, it is useful to refer to the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent of John Lynn Baker, Director of Immigration and Refugee Affairs Division, External Affairs Canada. The affidavit consists of twenty-five paragraphs and provides a complete description of the process at issue here, including the qualifications and responsibilities of the visa officers abroad. I quote paragraph 15: 
 
 
 
 "15. Alternate occupations will also be considered by the officers where there is the possibility that the applicant is qualified for and prepared to follow that occupation." 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  I take this to be a very important expression of fundamental fairness to the applicant. Counsel for the applicant asks me to find that it imposes upon the visa officer the obligation to assess alternate occupations inherent in the applicant's work experience, whether the applicant puts them forward or not. I am not prepared to go that far, but I do find that it puts beyond question the responsibility of the visa officer to do so where, as here, the applicant seeks it by designating alternate occupations in the application. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  It is also important to emphasize that the Immigration Act in s. 6 requires that those seeking landing in Canada must satisfy an immigration officer that they meet the selection standards set out in the Immigration Regulations, 1978. It is clearly, therefore, the responsibility of the applicant to produce all relevant information which may assist his application. The extent to which immigration officers may wish to offer assistance, counselling or advice may be a matter of individual preference or even a matter of departmental policy from time to time, but it is not an obligation that is imposed upon the officers by the Act or the Regulations. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  As a final general statement, it is useful to underline the limitations of review under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act. This is not an appellate review. To succeed the applicant must do more than establish the possibility that I might have reached a different conclusion than the visa officer in this assessment. There must be either an error of law apparent on the face of the record, or a breach of the duty of fairness appropriate to this essentially administrative assessment. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Turning now to this case, the facts are not in dispute and are contained in the affidavits of the applicant, Thakorlal Hajariwala, the Director of Immigration and Refugee Affairs Division of External Affairs, John Baker, the Justice Liaison Officer, Aphrodite Zografos and one of the applicant's solicitors, Anita Sulley. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The applicant is from India and was a temporary resident of New Jersey. On November 2, 1987, he applied to the Canadian Consulate General of Canada in New York for permanent residence in Canada, and stated that he was the manager-owner of a garment manufacturing and sales company in India. He indicated that he intended to pursue the occupation of purchasing officer - materials or sales representative in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  On December 16, 1987, the applicant attended at an interview with an immigration officer where he was questioned about the partnership of the business in India with his father and brother. The applicant indicated it was a textile business which involved the purchase of raw material and ready-made garments, and the sale to retailers of garments, both manufactured and ready-made. The officer asked about the applicant's main duties and was informed that he was involved in purchasing, selling, supervising employees and accounting. In response to further questions, the officer was told there were seven to nine employees, all tailors. Finally, the officer asked how much material the applicant purchased on behalf of the business and he indicated approximately 400,00 rupees worth of material annually. No further questions about the business or the applicant's duties or experience were posed by the officer. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  By letter dated December 17, 1987, the applicant was informed that his application for permanent residence in Canada was refused: 
 
 
 
 "After a careful and thorough review of your application, I regret to inform you that your request for entry as an immigrant to Canada has been refused since you have not been awarded any units of assessment for experience in the occupation you intend to follow in Canada. 
 
 
 
 "According to your application for permanent residence in Canada, your employment experience has been as 'Manager/Owner of a Garment Manufacturing & Sales Company'. During your interview on 16 December 1987, you stated that your responsibilities are: (1) purchasing materials, (2) taking orders from clients, (3) selling your goods, (4) supervising your employees and (5) keeping the accounts. In my view your experience corresponds to the definition (see attached) in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (C.C.D.O.) for a supervisor, Wholesale Establishment, C.C.D.O. 5130-122. I do not believe that your various responsibilities can be broken down into separate components for the purposes of awarding you units of assessment for experience in your alternative intended occupations, i.e. either Material Purchasing Officer or Garments Sales Representative. I am, therefore, unable to issue an immigrant visa to you pursuant to the previously mentioned subs. 11(1) of the Regulations." 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The applicant here seeks judicial review of that decision. The relevant statutory provisions are ss. 8(1)(a), 8(2), 9(1) and 11(1) of the Immigration Regulations, 1978: 
 
 
 
 "8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependants, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant, 
 
 
 
 (a) in the case of an immigrant, other than an immigrant described in paragraph (b), (c) or (e), on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I; ... 
 
 
 
 "8(2) A visa officer shall award to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I the appropriate number of units of assessment for each factor in accordance with the criteria set out in column II thereof opposite that factor, but he shall not award for any factor more units of assessment than the maximum number set out in column III thereof opposite that factor. 
 
 
 
 "9(1) Where an immigrant, other than a member of the family class, an assisted relative, a Convention refugee seeking resettlement or an investor, makes an application for a visa, a visa officer may, subject to s. 11, issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants, if 
 
 
 
 (a) he and his dependants, whether accompanying dependants or not, are not members of any inadmissible class and otherwise meet the requirements of the Act and these Regulations; and 
 
 
 
 (b) on the basis of his assessment in accordance with s. 8 
 
 
 
 (i) in the case of an immigrant other than a retired person or an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 70 units of assessment, or 
 
 
 
 (ii) in the case of an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 25 units of assessment. 
 
 
 
 "11(1) Subject to subss. (3) and (4), a visa officer shall not issue an immigrant visa pursuant to ss. 9 or 10 to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I and is not awarded any units of assessment for the factor set out in item 3 thereof unless the immigrant 
 
 
 
 (a) has arranged employment in Canada and has a written statement from the proposed employer verifying that he is willing to employ an inexperienced person in the position in which the person is to be employed, and the visa officer is satisfied that the person can perform the work required without experience; or 
 
 
 
 (b) is qualified for and is prepared to engage in employment in a designated occupation." 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  I conclude that the visa officer's failure to continue the assessment was a result of his interpretation that the legislation did not permit him to do so. As the officer stated in the letter received by the applicant: 
 
 
 
 "... I do not believe that your various responsibilities can be broken down into separate components for the purposes of awarding you units of assessment for experience in your alternative intended occupations ..." 
 
 
 
 Such an interpretation is a clear error of law. The Regulations permit the applicant to be assessed in "an occupation". The factors listed in column I of Schedule I require that the experience of the applicant be assessed with regard to his intended occupation. There is no reason why the actual experience and time spent in each of the various responsibilities in an occupation cannot be broken down to award units of assessment for experience in intended occupations. Paragraph 15 of the Baker affidavit, which I quoted previously, makes this quite clear. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  I should also add that as a matter of fairness the record should show that the applicant was given the opportunity to provide information in support of his current experience in each included occupation. The record must equally indicate reasons which support the visa officer's assignment of a specific experience rating to the included occupations or reasons which support the refusal to do so. Obviously, having erroneously concluded that no assessment need be done, the visa officer in this case failed in this aspect of the duty of fairness. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Accordingly, the application will succeed. Since here the visa officer has both breached a duty of fairness and committed an error of law, his decision is set aside. The respondent is directed to carry out the assessment in accordance with the Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations in a manner consistent with the interpretation placed upon them in these reasons for order. As indicated from the Bench, I did not deal with the claim related to assisted relatives as I assume that this matter can now be put forward during the reconsideration. The applicant will be entitled to his costs. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



