 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Sufaj, Rita, Leka, Antoneta and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 373)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Kane, J.
April 17, 2014.
Counsel:
Mike Bell, for the applicants;
Matina Karvellas, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Workable Immigration Solutions, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Kane, J.
: The applicants, a mother and her two children, seek judicial review pursuant to section 72 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (the "
Act
"), of the decision of a Senior Immigration Officer (the "Officer") made on July 20, 2013, which refused their Pre-Removal Risk Assessment ["PRRA"] and found that they were not Convention refugees or persons in need of protection pursuant to sections 96 or 97 of the
Act
.
[2]
For the reasons that follow, the application is dismissed.
Background
[3]
The principal applicant, Rita Sufaj, is a citizen of Albania. Her two children, the co-applicants, were born in the US and have American citizenship. In September 2003, the principal applicant left Albania for the US. Her refugee protection claim in the US was denied in February 2009. They arrived in Canada in August 2009, and claimed refugee protection.
[4]
In this application for judicial review, the principal applicant asserts that the new evidence she submitted in her PRRA application should have been considered to support her allegations that she faces the risk of gender-based violence if she were to return to Albania. The applicant submits that she was constrained from fully describing her past experience as a victim of a violent rape in Albania at her refugee protection hearing because her claim was joined to her brothers and other family members. She submits that the Officer was aware of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ["RPD"], the Personal Information Form ["PIF"] she submitted in support of her refugee protection claim, and her PRRA submissions, all of which should have resulted in the Officer considering the risks she faces of gender-based and other violence in Albania.
[5]
Some additional background to the applicants' claim is essential for context. The applicants alleged that they are fleeing from a blood feud in Albania and in the US between their family and the Isufaj family. The blood feud stems from the murder of the principal applicant's brother in Michigan in 1992, by members of the Isufaj family. The principal applicant also indicated that the feud was exacerbated by her marriage, while in the US, to Anton Leka, who had left his ex-wife, a member of the Isufaj family.
[6]
The applicants' claim for refugee protection was joined to that of the principal applicant's brothers and other members of the Sufaj family because they were all based on the same alleged blood feud with the Isufaj family in Albania and the US.
[7]
On September 19, 2011, the RPD denied the refugee claims of all the Sufaj applicants solely under paragraph 97(1)(b) of the
Act
. The Board found their testimony, including that of the current applicant, Rita Sufaj, to not be credible. On January 12, 2012, leave for judicial review of the RPD's decision was denied.
[8]
The current applicants applied for a PRRA in January 2013. In support of the PRRA, the principal applicant submitted, among other documents, photographs depicting scars on her neck that allegedly resulted from the rape she suffered in 2003 in Albania that was purportedly connected with the blood feud. The principal applicant submits that she did not disclose or show her scars to the RPD in front of her brothers because rape is of great shame in her culture. However, the Board was clearly aware of the allegations of rape and referred to this in its decision.
[9]
The applicants' submissions in their PRRA application refer only to insecurity in Albania and conclude with a general allegation "that if I am going to go back to Albania, I will be killed", without providing any additional details. The PRRA application attaches the PIF submitted to the IRB which provides the allegations of the blood feud, the murder of the principal applicant's brother, Prel, in Michigan, her brothers' efforts to have Prel's murder investigated, the impact of her marriage on the blood feud, and also indicates that a member of the Isufaj family paid someone in Albania to rape the principal applicant in 2003, that this occurred and that she then fled.
[10]
The affidavit that the principal applicant submits in support of her application for judicial review states that she had asked the RPD to have her claims separated from those of her brothers because she did not want to disclose the details of her rape in front of her brothers, due to the shame and victim blaming associated with rape in Albanian culture. This request was denied and she "felt that I could not discuss the rape". She also states that she has scars as a result of this attack and fears the man who attacked her.
[11]
This affidavit was not before the Officer.
The decision
[12]
The Officer noted that the RPD had found the principal applicant and her brothers to be not credible and found that the documentary evidence they had submitted had little or no weight. As a result, the RPD found there was no evidence to support their allegations. The RPD found that the dispute with the Isufaj family originated in the US and not in Albania.
[13]
The Officer also noted that in the PRRA application, the applicants reiterated the events from the principal applicant's PIF and stated that the political situation in Albania is unstable.
[14]
The Officer did not consider the majority of the documents submitted by the applicant as "new" because this evidence predated the applicants' refugee claim and no explanation was given as to why this evidence, which included several articles, was not presented or was not reasonably available during the refugee determination hearing. The Officer also considered the current country conditions in Albania and concluded that, while certain human rights issues remain a concern in Albania, there was no objective evidence to establish that the applicants faced a personalized risk if they were to return to Albania.
[15]
The Officer concluded that the applicant had not demonstrated on a balance of probabilities that she is in a blood feud with the Isufaj family or that she faces a personalized risk in Albania.
[16]
The Officer mentioned that the co-applicants are US citizens and there was no evidence presented of persecution or risk to them if returned to the US.
The issues
[17]
The applicants submit that the decision is not reasonable because the Officer erred by failing to conduct an analysis under section 96 of the
Act
of the principal applicant's status as a victim of sexual assault or member of a social group. The applicants also argue that the Officer failed to consider key evidence, including scars on the principal applicant's neck, which was not presented during her refugee hearing.
Was the officer's decision reasonable?
[18]
The applicants submit that the Officer did not provide an analysis under section 96 regarding gender-based persecution or women as a social group and that, despite recognizing the existence of human rights abuses in Albania, the Officer failed to grasp the implications of the photographs depicting the principal applicant's scars. The applicants submit that the Officer had the relevant information in front of him and should have taken the extra steps to conduct the section 96 analysis, even though it was not specifically submitted in the application.
[19]
The applicants also argue that the Officer erred in not holding a hearing regarding the photographs and in finding the photographs to be not credible solely on the basis that the RPD had already found the Sufaj claimants to be not credible. The applicants note that the RPD credibility findings had focused on the Sufaj brothers, who were the primary figures of the blood feud and had not made a credibility finding regarding the principal applicant's allegation of rape.
[20]
The respondent submits that a PRRA is not a second refugee hearing; rather a PRRA is to assess new risks which may have arisen between the RPD hearing and the removal date (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Imm LR (3d) 156 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]).
[21]
In this case, the respondent notes that the principal applicant made the same allegations in her PRRA that were considered and rejected by the RPD, namely that she faces a risk due to a blood feud in Albania and that she believed she was raped in 2003 as a result of that blood feud.
[22]
The respondent submits that the Officer cannot be faulted for not assessing Convention grounds that were never identified.
[23]
With respect to the photographs submitted by the principal applicant of scars that she stated resulted from her rape connected to the blood feud, the respondent submits that the applicants provided no explanation why these photocopied and undated photographs were submitted.
[24]
In response to the applicants' argument that the Officer erred in not holding a hearing, the respondent submits that PRRA hearings are held only in exceptional circumstances. The respondent argues that the Officer did not make a credibility finding about the photographs, but rather, after considering the allegation of rape in the principal applicant's narrative, along with the photographs, and the appropriate country condition documents, concluded that there was insufficient new evidence demonstrating a personalized risk.
The Officer's decision is reasonable
[25]
The applicants' counsel submits that the applicants have fallen through the cracks of the refugee protection system given that the principal applicant requested a separate claim or hearing before the RPD which was denied and, as a result, was denied the opportunity to fully describe the rape she experienced and to have her claim assessed in the appropriate context. Leave for judicial review of the RPD decision was refused. In addition, the applicant did not have the benefit of counsel in making her PRRA submissions.
[26]
Like many other refugee claimants, the applicants face many challenges. However, the decision of the Officer is reviewed on the standard of reasonableness and on the record that was before the Officer. Moreover, the RPD had considered the applicant's experience of rape, as it is noted in its decision. Whether the applicant was reluctant to fully describe her experience to the RPD can not be determined in the context of this judicial review, which relates only to the PRRA.
[27]
All the material submitted by the applicant relates to events tied to the alleged blood feud, which the RPD and the Officer considered. The applicants' submissions in their PRRA application focus on the instability of Albania and the attached PIF describes the blood feud in detail and mentions the principal applicant's rape as part of the blood feud.
[28]
It is well established that a PRRA is not an appeal of the RPD decision or a "do over".
[29]
As noted by Justice Shore in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2014] FCJ No 6:
[22] It is well established that the purpose of a PRRA application is to assess new risk developments that have occurred since a rejection of a refugee protection claim. A PRRA application cannot, and must not, be used as an appeal or reconsideration of a RPD decision rejecting a refugee protection claim ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 12).
[23] As stated by Justice Judith Snider in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[4] Canada has taken steps to ensure that a claimant is provided with a process whereby changed conditions and circumstances may be assessed. It follows that,
if country conditions or the personal situation of the claimant have not changed since the date of the RPD decision
, a finding of the RPD on the issue of state protection -
as a final, binding decision
of a quasi-judicial process -
should continue to apply to the claimant
. In other words, a claimant who has been rejected as a refugee
claimant bears the onus of demonstrating that country conditions or personal circumstances have changed since the RPD decision
such that the claimant, who was held not to be at risk by the RPD, is now at risk. If the applicant for a PRRA fails to meet that burden, the PRRA application will (and should) fail. [Emphasis added.]
(Reference is also made to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 59).
[24] Put simply, when considering the evidence in a PRRA application, an officer must ask whether the information it contains is significant or
significantly different from the information previously provided
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 46 at para 22-23; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 29;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 143 at para 38). [Emphasis in the original.]
[30]
The respondent also referred to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
supra
at para 5, where Justice Snider, reiterated the same principles:
[5] It is well-established that a PRRA is not intended to be an appeal of a decision of the RPD (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 11;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 21 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 14 (F.C.)). The purpose of the PRRA is not to reargue the facts that were before the RPD. The decision of the RPD is to be considered as final with respect to the issue of protection under s. 96 or s. 97, subject only to the possibility that new evidence demonstrates that the applicant would be exposed to a new, different or additional risk that could not have been contemplated at the time of the RPD decision. Thus, for example, the outbreak of civil war in a country or the imposition of a new law could materially change the situation of an applicant; in such situations the PRRA provides the vehicle for assessing those newly-asserted risks.
[31]
In this case, the RPD had already considered the principal applicant's allegation that she was raped as a result of the blood feud. The principle applicant is making the same allegation in her PRRA and the same arguments that were considered and rejected by the RPD: namely that she faces a risk due to a blood feud in Albania and that she believes that she was raped as a result of the feud.
[32]
In her PRRA application, the principal applicant submits that there is new evidence, being the undated and photocopied photographs entitled "photos from beatings", to support the personalized risk she would face if she were to return to Albania. She argues that she could not reasonably be expected to have presented evidence of her scars to the RPD, since she did not want to discuss her rape in front of her brothers, whose refugee claim was joined with hers. She also submits that she did not want her claim to be joined to that of her brothers.
[33]
Although the applicants argue that the context of the rape and the risk of gender-based violence were not considered by the RPD, given that the RPD assessed only the claim pursuant to section 97, the applicants have not provided new evidence or evidence of new risks to the Officer.
[34]
The applicants argue that the Officer should have been more alert to the risks and conducted a more comprehensive assessment of the section 96 risks given the documents before him.
[35]
As the respondent noted, there is no obligation on the Officer to go beyond the application and to seek out other grounds to support the application. The affidavit filed in support of the application for judicial review was not before the Officer.
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FTR 160, Justice Bédard clarified this principle:
[36] It was up to the applicant to provide the explanations in his affidavit in support of his PRRA application and at this stage, it is too late to supplement the deficient evidence.
[37] An analogous case is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (available on QL). At the time the application for a stay was made, the applicant had submitted an affidavit which provided much more detailed information about her fear of the risk she faced if she were to return to her country of origin.
[38] Justice Shore found that while this affidavit would have helped the PRRA officer better understand the applicant's file, the officer did not have it on hand when he made his decision. Consequently, he determined that, based on the evidence the officer had before him and his analysis of this evidence, the officer's decision was entirely reasonable and the intervention of the Court was not warranted.
[39] The onus is on the applicant who is applying for a PRRA to submit an application that is clear, detailed and complete, and to provide evidence to support his or her allegations.
[40] The Court has established on numerous occasions that the PRRA officer is under no obligation to gather or seek additional evidence or make further inquiries. Nor is the officer under any obligation to take measures or do research to clarify obscure or contradictory points or to bolster insufficient evidence (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.W.S. (3d) 1097). These principles were also applied recently in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (available on QL) and in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above.
[37]
The principal applicant indicated that she had been raped and the RPD acknowledged this allegation. The photographs relate to that same allegation. I do not agree that these photographs could be considered evidence of a new risk.
[38]
Although the principal applicant now offers an explanation why she did not present them to the RPD, the photographs would not make the allegations of the rape more or less credible nor change the nature of the risk she alleged, which was that she was raped due to the blood feud.
[39]
The onus is at all times on applicants to support their allegations with evidence.
[40]
In any event, the Officer did consider the photographs, whether or not they were new evidence, but still concluded that, on a balance of probabilities, the applicants are not involved in a blood feud with the Isufaj family and would, therefore, not be subject to a personalized risk in Albania.
[41]
With respect to the issue of whether an oral hearing should have been held, I agree with the respondent that there was no breach of procedural fairness. Oral hearings for PRRA proceedings are held only in exceptional circumstances, which were not present in this case (
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227, s 167). The Officer did not make a credibility finding with respect to the photographs. The Officer considered the photographs and reasonably found that they did not demonstrate that the applicants would face the risks they alleged.
[42]
The Officer's findings were reasonable. The Officer considered all the evidence presented and provided justification for his findings. The decision meets the reasonableness standard as it "fall(s) within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[43]
The application for judicial review is dismissed. No question was proposed for certification.
JUDGMENT
[44]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed.
2. No question was proposed for certification.
.........................
Sufaj, Rita,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demanderesses, une mère et ses deux filles, demandent sous le régime de l'article 72 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la Loi), le contrôle judiciaire de la décision, en date du 20 juillet 2013, par laquelle un agent d'immigration supérieur (l'agent) a rejeté leur demande d'examen des risques avant renvoi [la demande d'ERAR] et a refusé de leur reconnaître la qualité de réfugiées au sens de la Convention comme celle de personnes à protéger sous le régime des articles 96 et 97 de la Loi.
[2]
Pour les motifs exposés ci-après, la présente demande est rejetée.
Contexte
[3]
La demanderesse principale, Mme Rita Sufaj, est citoyenne albanaise. Ses deux filles, les codemanderesses, sont nées aux États-Unis et ont la citoyenneté américaine. La demanderesse principale a quitté l'Albanie pour se rendre aux États-Unis en septembre 2003. Les autorités américaines ont rejeté sa demande d'asile en février 2009. Elle est entrée avec ses deux filles au Canada en août 2009 et y a demandé l'asile.
[4]
Dans la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire, la demanderesse principale affirme que les nouveaux éléments de preuve qu'elle a présentés dans sa demande d'ERAR auraient dû être pris en considération. Ils étayaient ses allégations selon lesquelles elle serait exposée à un risque de violence du fait de son sexe si elle retournait en Albanie. Elle soutient qu'elle n'a pu décrire complètement, à l'audience de sa demande d'asile, le viol avec voies de fait qu'elle a subi en Albanie, car sa demande avait été traitée avec celles de ses frères et d'autres membres de sa famille. Elle fait en outre valoir que l'agent connaissait la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié [la SPR], le contenu du Formulaire de renseignements personnels [le FRP] qu'elle avait présenté au soutien de sa demande d'asile ainsi que ses observations relatives à l'ERAR, éléments qui auraient tous dû l'amener à prendre en considération les risques de violence du fait de son sexe et d'autres formes de violence auxquels elle serait exposée en Albanie.
[5]
Il est essentiel de rappeler d'autres faits relatifs à la demande d'asile des demanderesses pour en éclairer le contexte. Les demanderesses affirmaient chercher à échapper à une vendetta opposant, aussi bien aux États-Unis qu'en Albanie, leur famille à la famille Isufaj. Ce conflit a pour origine le meurtre d'un frère de la demanderesse principale commis au Michigan en 1992 par des membres de la famille Isufaj. La demanderesse principale a également fait valoir que son mariage contracté aux États-Unis avec Anton Leka, après que ce dernier eut quitté son ex-épouse, une Isufaj, avait aggravé cette querelle.
[6]
La demande d'asile des demanderesses a été réunie à celles des frères de la demanderesse principale et d'autres membres de la famille Sufaj au motif qu'elles se fondaient toutes sur la même vendetta qui opposerait les Sufaj aux Isufaj en Albanie et aux États-Unis.
[7]
Le 19 septembre 2011, la SPR a rejeté les demandes d'asile de tous les Sufaj sous le seul régime de l'alinéa 97(1)
b
) de la Loi. Elle a conclu à la non-crédibilité de leurs témoignages, y compris celui de la demanderesse principale à la présente instance, Mme Rita Sufaj. La demande d'autorisation de contrôle judiciaire de la décision de la SPR a été rejetée le 12 janvier 2012.
[8]
Les demanderesses à la présente instance ont demandé un ERAR en janvier 2013. La demanderesse principale a notamment produit, au soutien de sa demande d'ERAR, des photographies représentant des cicatrices sur son cou, laissées selon ses dires par le viol qu'elle aurait subi en 2003 en Albanie et qui serait lié à la susdite vendetta. Elle explique ne pas avoir invoqué ou montré ses cicatrices devant la SPR parce que ses frères étaient présents et que le viol est une grande honte pour la victime dans sa culture. Cependant, la SPR était manifestement informée des allégations de viol et y a fait référence dans sa décision.
[9]
Les observations des demanderesses dans leur demande d'ERAR mentionnent seulement l'insécurité qui règne en Albanie et se terminent par une affirmation générale de la demanderesse principale selon laquelle elle sera [traduction] « tuée si [elle] retourne en Albanie », sans plus de détails. On trouve joint à la demande d'ERAR le FRP produit devant la CISR, qui fait état de la vendetta, du meurtre de Prel, frère de la demanderesse principale, commis au Michigan, des efforts déployés par ses autres frères pour activer l'enquête sur ce meurtre ainsi que des conséquences de son mariage sur le conflit avec la famille Isufaj. On y précise en outre qu'un membre de cette dernière a payé un homme en Albanie pour la violer en 2003, que ce viol a effectivement eu lieu et qu'elle a ensuite fui le pays.
[10]
Selon l'affidavit produit par la demanderesse principale au soutien de la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire, elle avait demandé à la SPR d'examiner sa demande d'asile séparément de celles de ses frères parce qu'elle ne voulait pas exposer les circonstances de son viol en leur présence, étant donné que, dans la culture albanaise, la responsabilité du viol est rejetée sur la victime, qui s'en trouve déshonorée. La SPR a rejeté cette requête, de sorte qu'elle s'est [traduction] « sentie incapable de parler du viol ». Elle ajoute dans son affidavit qu'elle porte les marques de ce viol et qu'elle a peur de son agresseur.
[11]
Cet affidavit n'a pas été produit devant l'agent.
La décision attaquée
[12]
L'agent a fait observer que la SPR a conclu à la non-crédibilité de la demanderesse principale et de ses frères et a accordé peu, voire aucun, poids à la preuve documentaire qu'ils ont produite. En conséquence, la SPR a estimé que la preuve n'étayait pas leurs allégations. En outre, elle a conclu que la querelle avec la famille Isufaj avait pris naissance aux États-Unis et non en Albanie.
[13]
L'agent a également écrit que la demande d'ERAR mentionne les mêmes événements que ceux qui sont consignés dans le FRP de la demanderesse principale ainsi que l'instabilité de la situation politique en Albanie.
[14]
L'agent a refusé de considérer comme « nouveaux » la plupart des documents produits par Mme Sufaj au motif qu'ils étaient antérieurs à la demande d'asile des demanderesses, et qu'elle n'a pas expliqué pourquoi ces éléments, qui comprenaient plusieurs articles, n'avaient pas été produits à l'audience concernant ladite demande ou n'étaient pas alors normalement accessibles. L'agent a aussi examiné la situation actuelle en Albanie, pour conclure qu'il existait encore certains problèmes sur le plan des droits de la personne mais qu'aucune preuve objective n'établissait que les demanderesses seraient personnellement exposées à des risques si elles devaient y retourner.
[15]
L'agent a conclu que la demanderesse n'a pas démontré suivant la prépondérance des probabilités qu'elle est mêlée à une vendetta avec la famille Isufaj ni qu'elle serait personnellement exposée à des risques en Albanie.
[16]
L'agent a mentionné que les codemanderesses sont citoyennes américaines et que la preuve produite ne fait état d'aucun risque de persécution ou autre risque en cas de renvoi vers les États-Unis.
Les questions en litige
[17]
Les demanderesses soutiennent que la décision attaquée n'est pas raisonnable puisque l'agent aurait commis une erreur en omettant d'analyser, sous le régime de l'article 96 de la Loi, la situation de la demanderesse principale en tant que victime d'une agression sexuelle ou membre d'un groupe social déterminé. Les demanderesses font en outre valoir que l'agent a omis de prendre en considération des éléments de preuve de première importance qu'elles n'avaient pas produits à l'audience de leur demande d'asile, notamment les cicatrices dont est marqué le cou de la demanderesse principale.
La décision de l'agent est-elle raisonnable?
[18]
Les demanderesses soutiennent que l'agent n'a pas effectué en vertu d'analyse de l'article 96 concernant la persécution du fait du sexe ou les femmes en tant que groupe social, et que, même s'il a reconnu l'existence d'atteintes aux droits de la personne en Albanie, il n'a pas saisi les implications des photographies représentant les cicatrices de la demanderesse principale. Toujours selon les demanderesses, l'agent disposait des renseignements pertinents et aurait dû faire l'effort supplémentaire d'effectuer une analyse en fonction de l'article 96, même si elles n'invoquaient pas explicitement cet article dans leur demande d'ERAR.
[19]
Les demanderesses font aussi valoir que l'agent a commis une erreur en omettant de tenir une audience au sujet des photographies et en concluant à la non-crédibilité de celles-ci au seul motif que la SPR avait déjà déclaré non crédibles les demandeurs d'asile Sufaj. Selon les demanderesses, les conclusions de la SPR concernant la crédibilité s'appliquaient surtout aux frères Sufaj, qui étaient les principaux protagonistes de la vendetta, et la SPR ne s'était pas prononcée sur la crédibilité de l'allégation de viol formulée par la demanderesse principale.
[20]
Le défendeur fait valoir que l'ERAR n'est pas une deuxième audience relative à la demande d'asile, mais qu'il a plutôt pour fonction de permettre l'évaluation de nouveaux risques qui ont pu se manifester entre l'audience de la SPR et la date prévue pour le renvoi; voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm LR (3d) 156 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], paragraphes 9 à 13.
[21]
En l'espèce, fait observer le défendeur, la demanderesse principale a formulé dans sa demande d'ERAR les mêmes allégations que celles que la SPR avait examinées et rejetées, à savoir qu'elle est exposée à un risque en raison d'une vendetta sévissant en Albanie et qu'elle voit dans le viol subi en 2003 une conséquence de ce conflit.
[22]
Le défendeur avance qu'on ne peut reprocher à l'agent de ne pas avoir examiné des motifs prévus à la Convention qui n'ont jamais été explicitement invoqués.
[23]
Concernant les photographies produites par la demanderesse principale qui représentent des cicatrices qu'elle affirme résulter de son viol, lequel serait lui-même lié à la vendetta, le défendeur rappelle que les demanderesses n'ont aucunement expliqué pourquoi elles avaient présenté ces photographies, qui sont par ailleurs des photocopies et ne portent pas de date.
[24]
En réponse à l'argument des demanderesses selon lequel l'agent aurait commis une erreur en omettant de tenir une audience, le défendeur fait valoir qu'un ERAR ne donne lieu à la tenue d'une audience que dans des circonstances exceptionnelles. Le défendeur déclare par ailleurs que l'agent n'a pas tiré de conclusion sur la crédibilité des photographies, mais a plutôt estimé, après examen de l'allégation de viol figurant dans le récit de la demanderesse principale ainsi que desdites photographies et des documents pertinents concernant la situation en Albanie, que les nouveaux éléments de preuve censés démontrer l'existence d'un risque personnel étaient insuffisants.
La décision de l'agent est raisonnable
[25]
Selon leur avocat, les demanderesses sont tombées entre les mailles du filet du système de protection des réfugiés étant donné que la SPR a refusé à la demanderesse principale un examen séparé de sa demande d'asile ou une audience séparée et lui a, de ce fait, nié la possibilité de décrire son viol en détail et de voir examiner sa demande d'asile dans le contexte approprié. En outre, l'autorisation de demande de contrôle judiciaire de la décision de la SPR a été refusée et la demanderesse a formulé ses observations relatives à l'ERAR sans l'aide d'un avocat.
[26]
Comme beaucoup d'autres demandeurs d'asile, les demanderesses sont en butte à de nombreux problèmes. Cependant, la décision de l'agent doit être contrôlée suivant la norme du caractère raisonnable et en fonction du dossier dont il disposait. Qui plus est, il ressort de la décision de la SPR qu'elle avait pris en considération le viol de la demanderesse. La question de savoir si la demanderesse s'est sentie incapable de décrire son expérience en détail devant la SPR ne peut être tranchée dans le contexte du présent contrôle judiciaire, qui porte uniquement sur l'ERAR.
[27]
Tous les éléments produits par la demanderesse ont trait à des événements liés à la vendetta qui a été alléguée, que la SPR et l'agent ont pris en considération. Les observations formulées par les demanderesses dans leur demande d'ERAR se rapportent surtout à l'instabilité qui règne en Albanie, et le FRP joint à cette demande décrit la vendetta en détail et fait état du viol de la demanderesse principale survenu dans le cadre de ce conflit.
[28]
Il est bien établi qu'un ERAR n'est pas un recours contre la décision de la SPR ni une seconde chance de faire valoir les mêmes éléments.
[29]
Citons à ce propos les observations suivantes formulées par le juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2014] ACF no 6, aux paragraphes 22 à 24:
[22] Il est bien établi qu'une demande d'ERAR vise l'évaluation de nouveaux risques qui sont apparus depuis le rejet d'une demande d'asile. Une demande d'ERAR ne peut pas et ne doit pas servir d'appel ou de réexamen d'une décision de la SPR rejetant une demande d'asile ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 12).
[23] Comme l'a écrit la juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[4] [...] le gouvernement canadien a pris des mesures pour que le demandeur d'asile puisse bénéficier d'un processus dans le cadre duquel une modification des conditions et des circonstances peut être évaluée. Il s'ensuit que
si les conditions dans le pays ou la situation personnelle du demandeur d'asile sont demeurées les mêmes depuis la date de la décision de la SPR
, la décision de la SPR sur la question de la protection offerte par l'État - qui est
une décision définitive et exécutoire
rendue au terme d'un processus quasi judiciaire -
doit être maintenue à l'égard du demandeur d'asile
. Autrement dit, il incombe au demandeur d'asile dont la demande a été rejetée de
prouver que les conditions de son pays ou ses circonstances personnelles ont changé depuis la décision de la SPR
au point que celui-ci, dont la SPR a conclu qu'il n'était pas exposé à un risque, est maintenant exposé à un risque. Si le demandeur d'ERAR ne s'acquitte pas de ce fardeau, la demande d'ERAR sera (et devrait être) rejetée. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
(Voir également
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .)
[24] En termes simples, quand il examine les éléments de preuve relatifs à une demande d'ERAR, un agent doit se demander si l'information qu'elle contient est importante ou
sensiblement différente de celle produite précédemment
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 23; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 29;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[Souligné dans l'original.]
[30]
Le défendeur a aussi invoqué le paragraphe 5 de la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, où la juge Snider rappelle ces mêmes principes:
[5] Il est bien établi que l'ERAR ne constitue pas un appel d'une décision de la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (C.F.)). Le but de l'ERAR n'est pas de débattre à nouveau des faits présentés à la SPR. La décision de la SPR doit être considérée comme définitive pour ce qui est de la question de la protection prévue aux articles 96 ou 97, sous réserve uniquement de la possibilité que de nouveaux éléments de preuve démontrent que le demandeur sera exposé à un risque nouveau, différent ou supplémentaire qui ne pouvait pas être examiné au moment où la SPR a rendu sa décision. Ainsi, par exemple, l'éclatement d'une guerre civile dans un pays ou l'entrée en vigueur d'une nouvelle loi pourrait changer considérablement la situation du demandeur. Dans de telles situations, l'ERAR constitue le moyen d'évaluer ces nouveaux risques.
[31]
Dans le cas qui nous intéresse, la SPR avait déjà pris en compte l'allégation de la demanderesse principale selon laquelle elle avait été violée par suite de la vendetta. La demanderesse principale formule la même affirmation dans sa demande d'ERAR, et elle y avance les mêmes arguments que la SPR a examinés et rejetés, à savoir qu'elle serait personnellement exposée à un risque du fait d'une vendetta sévissant en Albanie et qu'elle croit avoir été violée en raison de cette même vendetta.
[32]
La demanderesse principale affirme dans sa demande d'ERAR qu'il existe de nouveaux éléments tendant à établir qu'elle serait personnellement exposée à un risque si elle retournait en Albanie, à savoir les photocopies de photographies non datées produites sous le titre
Photos from beatings
[Photographies attestant des violences physiques]. Il n'était pas raisonnable, selon elle, de considérer qu'elle aurait dû produire des preuves de ses cicatrices devant la SPR, étant donné qu'elle ne voulait pas parler de son viol en présence de ses frères. Leur demande d'asile avait été jointe à la sienne, chose qu'elle ne voulait pas.
[33]
Les demanderesses font valoir qu'étant donné qu'elle a examiné leur demande d'asile uniquement en fonction de l'article 97, la SPR n'a pas pris en considération le contexte du viol ni le risque de violence fondé sur le sexe, mais elles n'ont pas produit devant l'agent de nouveaux éléments de preuve ou d'éléments démontrant l'existence de nouveaux risques.
[34]
Les demanderesses soutiennent que l'agent aurait dû être plus sensibilité aux risques et effectuer un examen plus complet de ceux-ci à la lumière de l'article 96 eu regard aux documents dont il disposait.
[35]
Le défendeur soutient quant à lui que l'agent n'est aucunement tenu de suppléer aux insuffisances de la demande d'ERAR en recherchant d'autres motifs susceptibles de l'étayer. L'affidavit que les demanderesses ont produit au soutien de la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire ne faisait pas partie du dossier examiné par l'agent.
[36]
La juge Bédard a exposé ce principe en détail aux paragraphes 36 à 40 de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 160:
[36] Il appartenait au demandeur de fournir les explications contenues dans son affidavit au soutien de sa demande d'ERAR et à ce stade-ci, il est trop tard pour compléter une preuve déficiente.
[37]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (disponible sur QL) est analogue. Au stade de la demande en sursis, le demandeur avait fourni un affidavit qui offrait de l'information beaucoup plus détaillée sur ses craintes de risque advenant un retour dans son pays d'origine.
[38]
Le juge Shore a conclu que bien que cet affidavit aurait aidé l'agent d'ERAR à comprendre le dossier de la demanderesse, il ne se trouvait toutefois pas en sa possession au moment de rendre la décision. Il a par conséquent jugé que sur la base des preuves qui étaient devant lui et de l'analyse qu'il en a faite, la décision de l'agent était tout à fait raisonnable et ne nécessitait pas l'intervention de la Cour.
[39]
Il appartient au demandeur qui dépose une demande d'ERAR de fournir une demande complète, claire et détaillée et de produire toutes les preuves au soutien de ses allégations.
[40]
La Cour a établi à de nombreuses occasions que l'agent d'ERAR n'a pas l'obligation de recueillir ou de rechercher des preuves additionnelles ou de faire une quelconque enquête. Il n'a pas non plus l'obligation d'entreprendre des démarches et des recherches pour éclaircir des points obscurs, contradictoires ou pour combler une preuve insuffisante ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 1097). Ces mêmes principes ont été appliqués récemment dans l'arrêt  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (disponibles sur QL) et dans l'arrêt Gosal, précité.
[37] La demanderesse principale a déclaré qu'elle avait été victime d'un viol et la SPR a pris acte de cette allégation. Or, des photographies se rapportent à cette même allégation. Je ne souscris pas à la prétention voulant que ces photographies puissent être considérées comme une preuve de l'existence d'un nouveau risque.
[38] Même si la demanderesse principale explique maintenant pourquoi elle ne les a pas produites devant la SPR, les photographies en question n'auraient aucun effet sur la crédibilité de l'allégation de viol, pas plus qu'elles ne changeraient la nature du risque qu'elle a invoqué en affirmant avoir été violée en raison de la vendetta.
[39] Il incombe en tout temps aux demandeurs de produire des preuves à l'appui de leurs allégations.
[40]
Quoi qu'il en soit, indépendamment du fait qu'elles constituaient ou non de nouveaux éléments de preuve, l'agent a pris les photographies en considération, mais il a néanmoins conclu, suivant la prépondérance des probabilités, que les demanderesses ne sont pas mêlées à une vendetta avec la famille Isufaj et ne seraient donc pas exposées personnellement à des risques en Albanie.
[41]
En ce qui concerne la question de savoir si l'agent aurait dû tenir une audience, je pense comme le défendeur qu'il n'y a pas eu de manquement à l'équité procédurale en l'espèce. La tenue d'une audience dans le cadre d'un ERAR n'a lieu que dans des circonstances exceptionnelles, qui ne sont pas présentes en l'espèce (
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2002-227, article 167). L'agent n'a pas formulé de conclusion sur la crédibilité en ce qui a trait aux photographies. Après les avoir examinées, il est parvenu à la conclusion raisonnable qu'elles ne prouvaient pas que les demanderesses seraient exposées aux risques qu'elles invoquaient.
[42]
Les conclusions de l'agent étaient raisonnables. Il a examiné l'ensemble de la preuve qui lui avait été présentée et a motivé ses conclusions. Sa décision satisfait à la norme du caractère raisonnable étant donné qu'elle appartient « aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , paragraphe 47).
[43]
La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification.
JUGEMENT
[44]
LA COUR STATUE QUE
:
1. la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée;
2. aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification.
[End of document]