 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Institution (respondent) 
 
 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Division 
 
 Denault, J. 
 
 January 11, 1990. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 A prison inmate applied for certiorari to quash his conviction for assaulting a guard contrary to s. 39(b) of the Penitentiary Service Regulations. The inmate submitted that the calling of further witnesses after he testified constituted a splitting of the Crown's case, denied him procedural fairness and violated Commissioner's Directive No. 580. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 (See also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .) 
 
 
 
 Civil Rights - Topic 3152 
 
 Trials - Due process, fundamental justice and fair hearings - Criminal and quasi-criminal proceedings - Inmate discipline - Commissioner's Directive No. 580 required informing an accused inmate of the opportunity to give evidence after all the witnesses against him were heard - An inmate was charged with assaulting a guard - The guard testified - The inmate's testimony was conflicting - The disciplinary court requested that two eyewitnesses (guards) testify to resolve the conflict - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that the Directive was not violated, nor was the inmate denied procedural fairness - He had a full opportunity to hear evidence, state his case and cross-examine witnesses - The Crown did not split its case; additional evidence given in reply was permitted and the inmate was not prejudiced. 
 
 
 
 Prisons - Topic 1603 
 
 Discipline - Inmates - Disciplinary court hearing - Evidence - [See Civil Rights - Topic 3152]. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , refd to. [para. 8]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 385 (S.C.C.), refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 326 (S.C.C.), refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353 (S.C.C.), refd to. [para. 10]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), refd to. [para. 10]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 195 (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 10]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), refd to. [para. 11]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982, sect. 7 [para. 9]. 
 
 Commissioner's Directives - see Penitentiary Act. Penitentiary Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-5, sect. 37(3) [para. 8]. 
 
 Penitentiary Act, Commissioner's Directives, Directive No. 580, sect. 19 [para. 2]; sect. 21 [para. 9]. 
 
 Penitentiary Act Regulations, Penitentiary Service Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 1251, sect. 39(b) [para. 1]. 
 
 Penitentiary Service Regulations - see Penitentiary Act Regulations. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Sasha Pawliuk, for the applicant; 
 
 E. Resnick, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Sasha Pawliuk, Abbotsford, B.C., for the applicant; 
 
 John C. Tait, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on November 20, 1989, at Vancouver, British Columbia, before Denault, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on January 11, 1990. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Denault, J. 
 : The applicant seeks a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the Chairman of the Disciplinary Court at the Kent Institution penitentiary convicting him of the disciplinary offence of "assaulting or threatening to assault another person", contrary to s. 39(b) of the Penitentiary Service Regulations (C.R.C. 1978, c. 1251). 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The main issues in this case are whether the independent chairperson of the Disciplinary Court at Kent Institution misinterpreted the law applicable to a charge of assault and, by calling three witnesses after the applicant had given his evidence at the disciplinary hearing, violated s. 19 of the Commissioner's Directive No. 580 and the general rule of law that the Crown or plaintiff are not permitted to split their case. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The applicant is serving a twelve-year sentence. On June 7, 1989, he was incarcerated at Kent Maximum Security Institution. On that same date he was charged with an offence pursuant to s. 39(b) of the Penitentiary Service Regulations, of assaulting or threatening to assault another person. He was placed in solitary confinement. On June 14, 1989, the applicant was brought before the respondent in his capacity as the Independent Chairperson of the Disciplinary Court at Kent Institution in order to face the charge against him. The applicant pleaded not guilty to the charge. Living Unit Officer Cunningham, the guard the applicant was accused of assaulting, was called as first witness. He gave evidence that on June 7, 1989, at approximately 14:30, while he was in his office with the applicant, he ordered the applicant to leave the office three times but the inmate refused to follow the order. Cunningham tried to move the applicant out of his office by physically pushing him but then the applicant raised his arm and swung at Cunningham. The swing by the applicant missed Cunningham because he had ducked, but he then stood up and punched the applicant. They both fell to the floor. Living Unit Officers Robertson and Hammerstone then came into the unit and intervened to end the incident. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  After Mr. Cunningham had given his evidence, the applicant testified and stated that Mr. Cunningham had pushed him and that he had then raised his hand and told Mr. Cunningham not to push. The applicant then gave evidence that another officer grabbed him from behind and punched him after placing him in a headlock. At the close of the applicant's evidence, the respondent stated that he had to hear more evidence because he had conflicting stories before him. At that time, Case Management Officer McVickers was called for the purpose of providing more facts regarding the incident and the hearing was adjourned until later in the afternoon of the same day, at which time two other staff members were called to testify. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The respondent found on the evidence that Mr. Cunningham had pushed the applicant to enforce the order which the applicant did not comply with. But he found that Mr. Cunningham's actions did not justify the threatening action of the applicant to raise his fist and take a swing at Living Unit Officer Cunningham. Applicant was found guilty of threatening to assault the officer and sentenced to a warning because of special circumstances. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Applicant's counsel argues that the respondent acted in excess of or without jurisdiction by misdirecting himself as to the law applicable to a charge of assault and by not applying the law of self-defence to the charge before him. He further argues that by calling three witnesses after the applicant had given his evidence at the disciplinary hearing, the respondent violated paragraph 19 of Commissioner's Directive 580 and the general rule of law and practice governing the procedures followed in civil and criminal trials that the Crown or plaintiff is not permitted to split its case. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  I will first deal with the issue of splitting the case. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Section 37(3) of the Penitentiary Act authorizes the Commissioner of Corrections to make rules to be known as Commissioner's Directives. These directives do not have the force of law and they "are no more than directions as to the manner of carrying out the duties in the administration of the institution where they are employed" ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 129). Commissioner's Directive 580 pertains to the discipline of inmates. Paragraph 19 of that directive states that: 
 
 
 
 "If the plea is 'not guilty', the accused inmate(s) shall be informed of the opportunity to give evidence after all the witnesses against him/her have been heard. The inmate may submit a list of witnesses and/or documents he/she wishes prior to the hearing." 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  While counsel for the applicant agrees that the independent chairperson is not restricted to follow rules of evidence in criminal matters in conducting a disciplinary hearing (paragraph 21 of Commissioner's Directive), she submits that the manner in which the respondent conducted the hearing violated the applicant's rights pursuant to s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. She argues that the underlying reason for the rule is that the accused is entitled, at the close of the case against him, to know the full case in order that he be able to meet it adequately in response ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 385 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 326 (S.C.C.)). According to her, if the respondent was not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt at the conclusion of hearing Mr. Cunningham's evidence and the applicant's evidence of the applicant's guilt, he should have acquitted the applicant instead of calling other witnesses. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The principles governing the penitentiary discipline are to be found  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (No. 1) (supra) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 195 (F.C.A.), and may be summarized as follows: 
 
 
 
 1. A hearing conducted by an independent chairperson of the disciplinary court of an institution is an administrative proceeding and is neither judicial nor quasi-judicial in character. 
 
 
 
 2. Except to the extent there are statutory provisions or regulations having the force of law to the contrary, there is no requirement to conform to any particular procedure or to abide by the rules of evidence generally applicable to judicial or quasi-judicial tribunals or adversary proceedings. 
 
 
 
 3. There is an overall duty to act fairly by ensuring that the inquiry is carried out in a fair manner and with due regard to natural justice. The duty to act fairly in a disciplinary court hearing requires that the person be aware of what the allegations are, the evidence and the nature of the evidence against him and be afforded a reasonable opportunity to respond to the evidence and to give his version of the matter. 
 
 
 
 4. The hearing is not to be conducted as an adversary proceeding but as an inquisitorial one and there is no duty on the person responsible for conducting the hearing to explore every conceivable defence, although there is a duty to conduct a full and fair inquiry or, in other words, examine both sides of the question. 
 
 
 
 5. It is not up to this court to review the evidence as a court might do in a case of a judicial tribunal or a review of a decision of a quasi-judicial tribunal, but merely to consider whether there has in fact been a breach of the general duty to act fairly. 
 
 
 
 6. The judicial discretion in relation with disciplinary matters must be exercised sparingly and a remedy ought to be granted "only in cases of serious injustice" (Martineau No. 2, p. 360). 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  In the present case, I see no breach of duty to act fairly by the independent chairperson. It appears from the transcript of the oral evidence that the applicant was present, he was given full opportunity to hear evidence, to give his version of the case, to cross-examine the witnesses, and he even was offered the possibility of an adjournment or to call other witnesses, which he declined. The mere fact that the respondent, faced with two contradictory versions, decided to further investigate and hear more eyewitnesses to the event, does not mean that he failed to comply with the procedural rule stated in paragraph 19 of Commissioner's Directives. In fact, it rather seems that these witnesses were heard, in reply, after the applicant gave evidence. This is not illegal. Furthermore, as stated in the respondent's affidavit, the applicant was then offered to call more witnesses but he declined the proposition.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), my sister Reed, citing de Smith, decided in a similar case that: 
 
 
 
 "Even if that (disciplinary) court had failed to comply with some procedural rule, regulation or statutory provision, one would still have to ask whether that failure was of so severe a nature as to constitute a loss of jurisdiction." 
 
 
 
 After having examined the transcript of the evidence and considered the jurisprudence, I cannot conclude that the applicant has suffered any prejudice or was in any way treated unfairly by the respondent. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  I now turn to the argument that the respondent misdirected himself in the law applicable to a charge of assault by convicting the applicant in this situation. Applicant's counsel argues that in fact, it is her client that was unlawfully assaulted by Mr. Cunningham who was not justified by statute or common law to use force against the applicant, in this situation. Counsel further argues that if Mr. Cunningham had no lawful authority to assault the applicant, Mr. Hendrickson was justified in using force to defend himself so long as he used no more force than was necessary to prevent the assault or the repetition of it, by analogy to s. 37 of the Criminal Code. Counsel referred the court to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where penitentiary officers were convicted of common assault arising out of an attempt to shave a prisoner who had disobeyed an order of the director to shave off his beard. The presiding judge concluded that the actions of the accused constituted an unlawful assault unless justified by statute or common law, the complainant's security of person being guaranteed by the Canadian Bill of Rights even though he was a prisoner of a federal penitentiary. He further said that in that case, no circumstances of urgency or necessity had been established requiring use of force to enforce an order of such trivial nature. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The facts of the present case are quite different. The respondent summarized the event and found the applicant guilty in the following words: 
 
 
 
 "Well on the basis of the evidence that I have heard I'm satisfied that there was an assault. It seems to me that the officers have said that you were upset and you challenged Mr. Cunningham to fight. There was pushing by Mr. Cunningham and he did strike you, but the pushing was described as mild and it was done in conjunction with an order to leave and I, I don't find that it justified what has been described by the officers as your raising your fist to swing and taking a swing at Mr. Cunningham and so I find that there was a threat to assault. You are guilty of threatening to assault ..." 
 
 
 
 The evidence shows that the applicant was ordered three times to leave the office of Mr. Cunningham and the respondent found as a fact that the push given by him was mild and "done in conjunction with an order to leave" and in no way justified the applicant to raise his fist and threaten to assault. It is not up to this court to review the evidence but merely to consider whether there has been a breach of duty to act fairly. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  In brief, this court considers that there has in fact been no breach by the respondent of the general duty to act fairly. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  The application is dismissed with costs. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



