[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is one of fourteen applications under s. 44 of the Access to Information Act which came on for hearing before me on September 8, 1987 in Toronto, Ontario. While the specific facts of each application vary slightly, the principles involved are the same. I have therefore indicated that my reasons in the Piller Sausages [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] decision (Court No. T-1024-85) will apply, with necessary modifications, to this application.
[2]
On March 1, 1985, Ken Rubin, an Ottawa consumer researcher, filed a request under the Act for copies of the 1982-83 meat inspection audit reports on Canadian slaughter/meat packing plants. The nature of those reports is explained in detail in the Piller Sausages decision. This applicant, along with several others whose reports had been requested, filed objections to their release. It was advised on May 10, 1985 that the reports would be released with the exception of certain information which was exempted under s. 20(1)(b) of the Act. On May 29, 1985 the applicant filed a notice of motion requesting a review of that decision under s. 44 of the Act. The reports concerning companies which had not filed such applications were released to the requestor, together with the explanatory letter referred to in the Piller Sausages decision.
[3]
The requestor/intervenor in this case raises two preliminary points which were discussed on earlier motions for directions and again, in detail, at the hearing of this application. First, Mr. Rubin contends that the reports must be released under s. 20(2) of the Act, which reads:
"20(2) The head of a government institution shall not, pursuant to subsection (1), refuse to disclose a part of a record if that part contains the results of product or environmental testing carried out by or on behalf of a government institution unless the testing was done as a service to a person, a group of persons or an organization other than a government institution and for a fee."
If these reports are the result of product or environmental testing, it is argued, then all the arguments made by both applicants and respondent under s. 20(1) are irrelevant. The reports must be disclosed regardless of their potential to inflict harm on third parties. The intervenor went on at some length to discuss why he feels the material at issue here comes within s. 20(2). I find I cannot accept his position. The meat inspection audit reports are the product of an inspection process, not either environmental or product testing. The audit which produces them is a regularly conducted overview of plant conditions and inspection systems, not a test of product quality. This is not, therefore, the kind of information which must automatically be disclosed under s. 20(2).
[4]
Mr. Rubin's second submission was that I should consider whether the whole of the reports, including the portions already excised under s. 20(1)(b), should be released. However, I have no jurisdiction under the Act to consider that question. The refusal to release those portions of the reports has not been appealed and is not before me. This application is restricted to a review under s. 44 of the decision to disclose the remainder of the reports.
[5]
The applicant seeks to show that the reports, as expurgated, should not be released because the information they contain comes within ss. 20(1)(c) and (d) of the Act. It claims that release of the information could reasonably be expected to:
(1) result in material financial loss or gain to a third party (the applicant),
(2) prejudice the competitive position of a third party, or
(3) interfere with contractual or other negotiations of a third party.
[6]
To support this contention, Gainers relies on the expert evidence discussed in the Piller Sausages decision as to the nature of the meat products industry in Canada. In addition, it has provided statistics showing the decline in red meat consumption resulting from the increasing competition of non-meat protein products. The meat industry, it is argued, must convince consumers that meat is as nutritious, wholesome and healthy in order to regain its market. The release of this information would endanger that effect as the reports would be misleading to the layman, being intended only to bring deficiencies to the attention of plant operators.
[7]
The applicant submits as additional evidence of the possible effects of release, an incident in 1986 when hams sold under the Gainer's Eversweet label were contaminated as a result of refrigeration problems in a transport truck. As a result of press reports on the contamination, the Eversweet label was destroyed and the company's investment in it rendered worthless. The case of the Starkist tuna plant in New Brunswick is also cited. Demand for all tuna products dropped by 50% across the country as a result of reports on the rancid tuna produced by the plant. The plant itself was shut down and the brand destroyed. The suggestion is that similar effects will accompany the release of the meat audit reports.
[8]
The cases cited are not parallel to the one at bar. The important distinction is that in those cases the press reports were based directly on tainted
products
produced by the subject plants. As pointed out in the Piller Sausages decision, the meat audit reports are the result of a periodic audit of the physical facilities and general operation of the plants. The company's
products
are all subjected to a daily and continuous inspection which results in the affixation of the meat inspection legend. This assures the customer that the product has satisfied the government's high standards of purity and cleanliness. The audit reports comment on the inspection process and the physical condition of the plant. They are not an evaluation of the applicant's products as such.
[9]
The applicant also argues that press reports to date have exhibited a manipulative and exploitive approach to such reports, producing "horror story laundry lists" of plant defects (applicant's Memorandum of Fact and Law, para. 30). However, only one of the articles referred to was based on similar reports and it deals with Canadian reviews of American meat plants, many of which seem to have been well below Canadian standards. Even that article also mentions the American plants with which the Canadian inspectors were pleased. The reporting does not appear to be biased, but is based on very critical reports of highly unsatisfactory plants. That is not true of any of the reports filed in evidence here.
[10]
The remaining articles relied on by this applicant deal not with similar reports but with these proceedings. The applicant complains that the reporters refer to the unreleased reports as "secret" and "similar to those on the rancid Starkist tuna". I cannot conclude, however, that similar comments would necessarily have been made if the authors had had access to the reports themselves. In any case, no evidence was produced of any financial or contractual harm resulting from this reporting.
[11]
In the final analysis, this applicant's arguments suffer from the same gap in credibility which was apparent in the Piller Sausages application. I am not prepared to find that the release of these audit reports, with or without possible negative publicity, will result in the market fluctuations this applicant alleges. Consumers, trading partners and importers surely cannot be expected to ignore the positive information produced by the daily inspections, the accompanying release letter, and the high rating given these plants in the reports themselves in favour of relying on a few negative comments about relatively minor deficiencies in the applicant's physical plant. Add to that the fact that these reports are all over three years old and I must conclude that no material harm can reasonably be expected to result from their release. In the alternative, the public interest in their disclosure outweighs any risk of harm to this applicant.
[12]
For these reasons, I have concluded that the meat inspection audit reports may be disclosed in the form proposed by the Department of Agriculture. The application to resist disclosure is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]