 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  2008. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Nabiloo, a permanent resident, was convicted of two offences under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. She was sentenced to three years for one offence and 30 months (concurrent) for the other. Nabiloo filed an appeal of her conviction and sentence, which was still outstanding. Nabiloo was declared inadmissible to Canada on grounds of serious criminality pursuant to s. 36(1)(a) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) and ordered deported. Nabiloo appealed her deportation order to the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Appeal Division (IAD). The IAD requested submissions as to why s. 64 of the IRPA did not apply to bar the IAD from considering her appeal. In her response, Nabiloo requested that the IAD postpone its decision until a final determination had been made on her appeal of her conviction and sentence. The IAD dismissed the application for an adjournment and dismissed the appeal "for lack of jurisdiction". Nabiloo applied for judicial review of the IAD's decision. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1746 
 	 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Immigration - Exclusion - Particular persons - Persons convicted of crime - [See both  
 Aliens - Topic 1853 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1797.2 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Deportation and exclusion of persons in Canada - Deportation or removal order - Appeals or judicial review - [See both  
 Aliens - Topic 1853 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1853 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Immigration and Refugee Board (incl. Immigration Division and Immigration Appeal Division) - Right of appeal - Nabiloo, a permanent resident, was convicted of two offences under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act - She was sentenced to three years for one offence and 30 months (concurrent) for the other - Nabiloo filed an appeal of her conviction and sentence, which was still outstanding - Nabiloo was declared to be inadmissible to Canada on grounds of serious criminality pursuant to s. 36(1)(a) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) and ordered deported - Nabiloo appealed her deportation order to the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Appeal Division (IAD) - Section 64(1) of the IRPA provided that no appeal could be made to the IAD by a permanent resident if the permanent resident had been found to be inadmissible on grounds of serious criminality - Section 64(2) stated that "serious criminality must be with respect to a crime that was punished in Canada by a term of imprisonment of at least two years" - Nabiloo argued that s. 64(2) could only be applied after there was no doubt that she had been punished by a term of imprisonment and, for the IAD to be certain of that, it had to wait until her criminal appeal was finally disposed of - The Federal Court rejected the argument - Until Nabiloo's conviction or sentence was changed, she remained an individual who had been sentenced to two or more years of imprisonment and hence was criminally inadmissible and barred from bringing an appeal to the IAD pursuant to s. 64(2) - See paragraph 16. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1853 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Immigration and Refugee Board (incl. Immigration Division and Immigration Appeal Division) - Right of appeal - Nabiloo, a permanent resident, was convicted of two offences under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act - She was sentenced to three years for one offence and 30 months (concurrent) for the other - Nabiloo filed an appeal of her conviction and sentence, which was still outstanding, and was released on bail - Nabiloo was declared to be inadmissible to Canada on grounds of serious criminality pursuant to s. 36(1)(a) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) and ordered deported - Nabiloo appealed her deportation order to the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Appeal Division (IAD) - Section 64(1) of the IRPA provided that no appeal could be made to the IAD by a permanent resident if the permanent resident had been found to be inadmissible on grounds of serious criminality - Section 64(2) stated that "serious criminality must be with respect to a crime that was punished in Canada by a term of imprisonment of at least two years" - Nabiloo argued that since she had not been taken into custody, she had not been punished by a term of imprisonment as defined by s. 64(2), and accordingly the section did not apply - The Federal Court rejected the argument - The jurisprudence was clear that a person was punished according to s. 64(2) if they had received a sentence of two or more years of imprisonment - See paragraphs 10 to 15. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 4]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
 Cheddesingh - see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  leave to appeal refused (2007), 374 N.R. 397 (S.C.C.), refd to. [para. 17]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 20]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 23]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27, sect. 64 [para. 8]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Shepherd Moss and Gabriel F. Chand, for the applicant; 
 
 Marjan Double, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Shepherd Moss, Vancouver, British Columbia, and Chand & Company, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the applicant; 
 
 John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on January 16, 2008, at Vancouver, British Columbia, before Snider, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following decision on February 1, 2008. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 I.  
 Introduction 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Snider, J. 
 : The Applicant, Ms. Ashraf Nabiloo, is a permanent resident of Canada who, on October 8, 2005, was convicted in the Supreme Court of British Columbia (SCBC) of two offences contrary to the provisions of the  
 Controlled Drugs and Substances  
 Act 
 , S.C. 1996, c. 19 ( 
 CDSA 
 ). On January 16, 2006, she was sentenced to three years for one offence and 30 months for the other, to be served concurrently. Ms. Nabiloo immediately filed an appeal of her conviction and sentence (which appeal is still outstanding) and was released on bail. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  After a hearing before the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Division (Immigration Division), on November 21, 2006, Ms. Nabiloo was declared to be inadmissible to Canada on grounds of serious criminality pursuant to s. 36(1)(a) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection  
 Act 
 , S.C. 2001, c. 27 ( 
 IRPA 
 ) and ordered deported. Not to be deterred, on December 21, 2006, she commenced an appeal of her deportation order to the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Appeal Division (IAD). A response to her appeal arrived in a letter from the IAD dated March 29, 2007. In that letter, the IAD requested submissions as to why s. 64 of  
 IRPA 
  did not apply to bar the IAD from considering her appeal. In her written submissions in response to this preliminary question, Ms. Nabiloo requested that the IAD postpone its decision until a final determination has been made on her appeal of her conviction and sentence. In a decision dated June 28, 2007, the IAD dismissed the application for an adjournment and dismissed the appeal "for lack of jurisdiction". Ms. Nabiloo now asks this Court to overturn the decision of the IAD. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The determinative issue in this judicial review application is the following: 
 
 
 
 Does the phrase "a crime that was punished in Canada by a term of imprisonment of at least two years" used in s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  apply where the underlying conviction and sentence are the subject of an outstanding criminal appeal? 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Ms. Nabiloo, in her written submissions, also raised the issue of whether the IAD erred by refusing the request for an adjournment. However, as acknowledged by the parties, a tribunal that does not have jurisdiction to decide a matter does not have jurisdiction to consider preliminary or interlocutory issues pertaining to that matter ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 41). As I have determined, for the reasons that follow, that the IAD had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal, it follows that the IAD could not have considered the request for an adjournment. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Statutory Scheme 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The statutory scheme in this case begins with the inadmissibility provisions of  
 IRPA 
 . Under s. 36(1)(a), a permanent resident or foreign national is inadmissible on grounds of serious criminality: 
 
 
 
 "Serious criminality 
 
 
 
 "36(1) A permanent resident or a foreign national is inadmissible on grounds of serious criminality for 
 
 
 
 (a) having been convicted in Canada of an offence under an Act of Parliament punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment of at least 10 years, or of an offence under an Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of more than six months has been imposed" 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "Grande criminalité 
 
 
 
 "36(1) Emportent interdiction de territoire pour grande criminalité les faits suivants: 
 
 
 
 a) être déclaré coupable au Canada d'une infraction à une loi fédérale punissable d'un emprisonnement maximal d'au moins dix ans ou d'une infraction à une loi fédérale pour laquelle un emprisonnement de plus de six mois est infligé" 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In Ms. Nabiloo's case, the next steps culminated in the issuance of a removal order by the Immigration Division pursuant to s. 45(d) of  
 IRPA 
 , which provides that: 
 
 
 
 "Decision 
 
 
 
 "45. The Immigration Division, at the conclusion of an admissibility hearing, shall make one of the following decisions: 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (d) make the applicable removal order against a foreign national who has not been authorized to enter Canada, if it is not satisfied that the foreign national is not inadmissible, or against a foreign national who has been authorized to enter Canada or a permanent resident, if it is satisfied that the foreign national or the permanent resident is inadmissible" 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "Décision 
 
 
 
 "45. Après avoir procédé à une enquête, la Section de l'immigration rend telle des décisions suivantes: 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 d) prendre la mesure de renvoi applicable contre l'étranger non autorisé à entrer au Canada et dont il n'est pas prouvé qu'il n'est pas interdit de territoire, ou contre l'étranger autorisé à y entrer ou le résident permanent sur preuve qu'il est interdit de territoire." 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Section 63(3) of  
 IRPA 
  provides a right of appeal to the IAD "against a decision at an ... admissibility hearing to make a removal order against them". 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  This statutory right of appeal to the IAD against removal orders is, however, subject to a restriction in certain cases. Specifically relevant to this application, s. 64(1) and (2) provide that: 
 
 
 
 "No appeal for inadmissibility 
 
 
 
 "64(1) No appeal may be made to the Immigration Appeal Division by a foreign national or their sponsor or by a permanent resident if the foreign national or permanent resident has been found to be inadmissible on grounds of security, violating human or international rights, serious criminality or organized criminality. 
 
 
 
 Serious criminality 
 
 
 
 "(2) For the purpose of subsection (1), serious criminality must be with respect to a crime that was punished in Canada by a term of imprisonment of at least two years." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "Restriction du droit d'appel 
 
 
 
 "64(1) L'appel ne peut être interjeté par le résident permanent ou l'étranger qui est interdit de territoire pour raison de sécurité ou pour atteinte aux droits humains ou internationaux, grande criminalité ou criminalité organisée, ni par dans le cas de l'étranger, son répondant. 
 
 
 
 Grande criminalité 
 
 
 
 "(2) L'interdiction de territoire pour grande criminalité vise l'infraction punie au Canada par un emprisonnement d'au moins deux ans" 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  A question of the IAD's jurisdiction is a question of law. As such, the issue will be reviewed on the standard of correctness ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 10;  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 15). 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Ms. Nabiloo submits that s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  is concerned with the "punishment" and "term of imprisonment" the Applicant has received. She looks to s. 719(4) of the  
 Criminal Code 
  for the proper interpretation of these terms and notes that the  
 Criminal Code 
  stipulates that a sentence begins to run once an individual is taken into custody. As Ms. Nabiloo has not been taken into custody in the case at bar, she submits she has not been punished by a term of imprisonment as defined by s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
 , and accordingly the section does not apply. Further, she contrasts s. 36(1)(a) to s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  and notes that while the former is based on the sentence that has been imposed, the latter requires the IAD to determine whether an individual has been incarcerated. Finally, Ms. Nabiloo submits that s. 64(2) can only be applied after there is no doubt that she has been punished by a term of imprisonment. For the IAD to be certain of this, it is required to wait until Ms. Nabiloo's criminal appeal is finally disposed of. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  I do not find merit in these arguments. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The proper interpretation of the word "punished" in s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  has been considered numerous times by this Court. Most similar to the case at bar is the case of  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where the Court considered the proper interpretation of s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  in respect of an applicant who had been sentenced to two years plus a day of imprisonment (see, also,  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 71;  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paras. 66-70;  
 Cheddesingh 
 , above at paras. 25-30;  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 5). The case law to-date is unanimous that the word "punished" in s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  refers to the  
 sentence imposed, not the actual duration of incarceration. 
  Indeed, replacing the word "Applicant" with "Ms. Nabiloo" and "Supreme Court of Nova Scotia" with "SCBC", I refer to and adopt Justice Heneghan's analysis in  
 Cartwright 
 , above at paras. 59-67 on this point: 
 
 
 
 "The wording of s. 64(2) is not immediately clear. It states that a person will fall within the definition of 'serious criminality' and have his or her appeal rights curtailed before the IAD, with respect to 'a crime' that 'was punished' in Canada 'by a term of imprisonment' of at least two years. The words 'was punished' are very different from the wording of the inadmissibility provisions of the former  
 Act 
 , where the maximum term of imprisonment that may be imposed for a particular crime was often the governing consideration (ss. 19(1) and (2) of the former  
 Act 
 ). 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "The interpretation of the words of s. 64(2) in their 'grammatical and ordinary sense' means that it is the actual punishment which an individual received in Canada which is determinative. The introductory wording of s. 64(2), 'For the purpose of subsection 1 ...', suggests, in my view, that this provision is to be read separately from s. 36(1)(a) of  
 IRPA 
 , which defines serious criminality for the purpose of inadmissibility and speaks in terms of possible sentences which may be imposed for an offence. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "Despite the fact that s. 64(2) cannot be interpreted along the same lines as s. 36(1)(a) of  
 IRPA 
  and the fact that the definition differs from the former  
 Act's 
  definition of criminality, in my view, the interpretation urged by the Applicant cannot be accepted.  
 It is the term of imprisonment imposed which s. 64(2) describes, rather than the actual length of time served in prison 
  prior to being granted parole. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "To 'punish' a person for a crime is to impose judicial sanction; it is to pronounce a sentence relative to the crime for which a conviction has been entered. In my opinion, this definition of 'punish' supports the interpretation that  
 the Applicant was 'punished' at the time of his sentencing 
 , when the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia convicted and sentenced him to four years imprisonment in a federal penitentiary." (Emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  In sum, the jurisprudence is clear: a person is punished according to s. 64(2) if they have received a sentence of two or more years of imprisonment. Applying this principle to the case at bar, it is evident that, at the moment the IAD considered whether it had jurisdiction to hear Ms. Nabiloo's appeal, she had been sentenced to such a term. By concluding that s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
  barred Ms. Nabiloo's appeal, the IAD was merely following the case law. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  In rejecting Ms. Nabiloo's interpretation of s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
 , I also note the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paras. 10-11: 
 
 
 
 "The objectives as expressed in the  
 IRPA 
  indicate an intent to prioritize security. This objective is given effect by preventing the entry of applicants with criminal records, by removing applicants with such records from Canada, and by emphasizing the obligation of permanent residents to behave lawfully while in Canada ... 
 
 
 
 "In keeping with these objectives, the  
 IRPA 
  creates a new scheme whereby persons sentenced to more than six months in prison or inadmissible:  
 IRPA 
 , s. 36(1)(a).  
 If they have been sentenced to a prison term of more than two years then they are denied a right to appeal their removal order: an  
 IRPA 
 , s. 64. 
  ... [T]he act is clear: a prison term of over six months will bar entry to Canada;  
 a prison term of over two years bans an appeal 
 ." (Emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  An interpretation of s. 64(2) which allows a convicted person to be treated as a serious criminal as soon as the conditions identified in s. 64(2) exist - regardless of the possibility of changed circumstances in the future - is more consistent with the emphasis on security identified in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , than one which would allow a convicted person to circumvent the normal procedures in  
 IRPA 
  by the mere filing of an appeal. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  I also find additional support for my analysis from criminal law principles. In the criminal sphere the status of a convicted person remains the same until his or her conviction is overturned by a higher court. The mere filing of an appeal does not change that status ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 102, quoting from  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 672). Similarly, I find that the status of Ms. Nabiloo does not change even though she has filed a criminal appeal. The fact remains that, until her conviction or sentence is changed, Ms. Nabiloo remains an individual who has been sentenced to two or more years of imprisonment and hence is criminally inadmissible and barred from bringing an appeal to the IAD pursuant to s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
 . 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Ms. Nabiloo has raised the possibility that, should her appeal be successful, she would in the untenable position of being the subject of an unappealable removal order without being a serious criminal. This, she submits, is because the reopening of an IAD decision may only occur where the IAD is satisfied that there has been a failure to observe a principle of natural justice ( 
 IRPA 
 , s. 71). In support of this position, Ms. Nabiloo relies on the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in the case of  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  leave to appeal refused  [2007] S.C.C.A. No. 196; 374 N.R. 397 (S.C.C.). 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  My first observation is that the existence of such an eventuality does not preclude an interpretation of s. 64(2) which is consistent with criminal law principles, consistent with the case law to-date on s. 64(2), and consistent with the intent of s. 64(2) as described in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  However, I also do not believe that Ms. Nabiloo would be without recourse to the IAD. The decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
  is not directly applicable to the circumstances faced by Ms. Nabiloo. In  
 Nazifpour 
 , the Court of Appeal was considering whether s. 71 of  
 IRPA 
  extinguished the jurisdiction of the IAD to reopen an appeal against a deportation order. The Court of Appeal found that it did, except where the IAD had failed to observe a principle of natural justice. In contrast 
 , 
  in the case before me, the question is not whether the IAD has jurisdiction to reopen an appeal from the  
 IAD 
  but whether the IAD has jurisdiction to hear the appeal of a deportation order made by the  
 Immigration Division 
 . But for s. 64(2) of  
 IRPA 
 , the IAD would have jurisdiction to consider all of the circumstances surrounding the conviction of Ms. Nabiloo, including humanitarian and compassionate considerations. The IAD would not be limited to considering whether the Immigration Division had breached its duty of fairness - as was the situation  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 . 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  What avenues are open to Ms. Nabiloo if she is successful on her criminal appeal? Let me assume that Ms. Nabiloo's sentence is reduced such that she is no longer inadmissible to Canada due to serious criminality as defined in  
 IRPA 
 . In such an event she would no longer be barred by s. 64 of  
 IRPA 
  from bringing an appeal to the IAD of the deportation order. Her application to the IAD could be brought under s. 63(3) of  
 IRPA 
  and not as an appeal of the earlier IAD decision under s. 71. Should these events come to pass, I acknowledge that Ms. Nabiloo would be out of time for bringing an appeal to the IAD ( 
 Immigration Appeal Division Rules 
 , S.O.R./2002-230, r. 7(2)). However, Ms. Nabiloo would still be able to apply for an extension of time to bring her appeal ( 
 Immigration Appeal Division Rules 
 , S.O.R./2002-230, r. 58(d)). Since s. 64(2) would no longer apply to bar the hearing of her appeal, the IAD would have jurisdiction to consider the request for an extension of time and the appeal of the removal order (see  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paras. 34-36). 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  For these reasons, I will dismiss the application for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  On the issue of whether a question should be certified in this case, the Respondent submits that the law is settled. However, the parties agree that, if the Court chooses to certify a question, such question should be as follows: 
 
 
 
 Does the phrase "a crime that was punished in Canada by a term of imprisonment of at least two years" used in s. 64(2) of the  
 IRPA 
  apply where the underlying conviction(s) and/or sentence is/are the subject of an outstanding criminal appeal(s)? 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  To be certified, a question of general importance must transcend the interests of the parties to the litigation, contemplate issues of broad importance and be determinative of the appeal ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 176 N.R. 4 (F.C.A.), at para. 4). In my view the proposed question satisfies these criteria. Accordingly, I will certify this question. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [24] 
   
 THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that 
 
 
 
 1. the application for judicial review is dismissed; and 
 
 
 
 2. the following question is certified: 
 
 
 
 Does the phrase "a crime that was punished in Canada by a term of imprisonment of at least two years" used in s. 64(2) of 
  IRPA 
  apply where the underlying conviction(s) and/or sentence is/are the subject of an outstanding criminal appeal(s)? 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Angela E. McKay/gs 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



