[1]
Dawson, J.
: Subsection 83(2.1) of the
Canada Pension Plan Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-8 ("
Act
") permits a designated member of the Pension Appeals Board ("Board") to grant leave to appeal to the Board a decision of the Review Tribunal constituted under the
Act
. Leave is to be sought within 90 days of the communication of the Review Tribunal's decision to the aggrieved party, or within such longer period as a designated member of the Board may allow.
[2]
Rules 4 and 5 of the
Pension Appeals Board Rules of Procedure (Benefits)
C.R.C. c. 390 ("
Rules
") provide that an application for leave shall contain: the date of the decision of the Review Tribunal, the name of the place at which the decision was rendered and the date on which the decision was communicated to the appellant; the full name and postal address of the appellant; the name of any agent or representative on whom service of documents may be made, and the agent's full postal address; the grounds upon which the appellant relies in order to obtain leave to appeal; and a statement of the allegations of fact, including any reference to statutory provisions, constitutional provisions, and reasons the appellant intends to submit, and documentary evidence the appellant intends to rely on in support of the appeal. Where an extension of time is sought for the purpose of bringing an application for leave, the grounds on which the extension is sought are to be stated. Section 83 of the
Act
and Rules 4 and 5 are contained in the appendix to these reasons [Appendix Omitted].
[3]
Mr. Roy was found not to be disabled by the Review Tribunal in a decision dated December 3, 2002. Mr. Roy did not seek leave to appeal the decision within 90 days of receiving it. Instead, some 18 months later, on June 23, 2004, he wrote to the Board requesting leave to appeal. His request failed to contain all of the information required by the Rules. In its entirety, the leave application stated:
"I am writing to ask for leave to appeal the decision of Review Tribunals Decision in 2002. Mainly because the Insurance Company wants to know about a decision." (reproduced as written)
[4]
Mr. Roy also provided his social insurance number, date of birth and mailing address.
[5]
Mr. Roy later provided further information to the Board by letter dated August 8, 2004:
"Review Tribunal date of hearing was November 5, 2002. The decision of the tribunal received Dec 3, 2002. Main reason for requesting for appeal is hassled by Insurance Company. No new facts supporting appeal. And no new medical information." (reproduced as written)
This information may well have been provided by Mr. Roy in response to a request for further information made by the Board. Missing from Mr. Roy's application was any request for an extension of time for the bringing of his leave application.
[6]
On September 17, 2004, a designated member of the Board granted Mr. Roy both an extension of time and leave to appeal the decision of the Review Tribunal to the Board. The Minister of Human Resources Development ("Minister") brings this application for judicial review of that decision.
[7]
The Minister's application for judicial review was heard on October 4, 2005. Mr. Roy neither filed responding material to the Minister's application nor appeared at the hearing of the application. After hearing the submissions of counsel for the Minister, the application for judicial review was allowed for reasons to be delivered. These are those reasons.
[8]
Subsection 83(1) of the
Act
confers a discretion to extend the already generous period provided in the
Act
for the bringing of leave applications. While criteria are not provided in the
Act
or
Rules
to govern the exercise of that discretion, as a matter of law such discretion is to be exercised in a principled fashion. This promotes, among other things, fairness and consistency in results, and avoids arbitrary and capricious decision-making.
[9]
As for the principles to be applied when considering a request for an extension of time under subsection 83(1) of the
Act
, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.):
1. A continuing intention to pursue the appeal is established.
2. The leave application discloses an arguable case for appeal.
3. There is a reasonable explanation provided for the delay.
4. No prejudice would result to the party opposite if the extension is allowed.
[10]
I agree that they are apposite criteria.
[11]
Turning to the application of these criteria to the record before the designated member of the Board:
1. There was no evidence of a continuing intention to pursue the appeal. Indeed Mr. Roy expressed no interest in an appeal, except for the pressure being applied by his insurer.
2. There was no suggestion of the existence of an arguable case. No new facts or new medical information existed. Further, Mr. Roy had testified before the Review Tribunal that he believed himself capable of performing the duties of a security or fire control position, and the Review Tribunal had relied upon this testimony to conclude that Mr. Roy was capable of regularly pursuing a substantially gainful occupation.
3. No explanation for the delay was provided.
4. Arguably, granting the extension of time would result in prejudice to the Minister, arising from the combination of the 18-month delay with the fact that hearings before the Board are generally de novo. See, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (PAB).
[12]
In those circumstances, in the absence of any reasons for the decision at issue, I conclude that either the designated Board member erred in law by failing to apply the correct criteria to the implied request for an extension of time, or that he reached his decision without regard for the material before him. The Court's intervention is therefore warranted on any standard of review, and the application for judicial review will be allowed.
[13]
Before concluding, I acknowledge that subsection 83(3) of the
Act
only requires that written reasons be rendered on a leave application where leave is refused. I adopt, however, the direction of the Federal Court of Appeal, delivered in
Canada (Canadian Security Intelligence Service-CSIS)
, [1993] F.C.J. No. 1369 (F.C.A.), at paragraph 3, to the effect that where a full discretionary power has been conferred upon a judicial officer, and where there is nothing on the face of the record that suggests the judicial exercise of the discretion, it is incumbent upon the judicial officer to support the exercise of discretion with reasons.
ORDER
[14]
THIS COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The application for judicial review is allowed and the decision of the designated member of the Pension Appeals Board, dated September 17, 2004, is hereby set aside.
2. The matter is remitted for redetermination by a different member of the Board in accordance with these reasons.
3. No costs were sought and none are awarded.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/vnh
[End of document]