 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Kenia Kedesh Colin Villarroel, Alejandra Castillo Codin and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 417)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Noël, J.
May 2, 2014.
Counsel:
Cristina Marinelli, for the applicants;
Edith Savard, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Cristina Marinelli, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Noël, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (IRPA) of a decision rendered on June 12, 2013, by Youssoupha Diop, a member of the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB), in which it was determined that the applicants were neither Convention refugees pursuant to section 96 of the IRPA nor persons in need of protection pursuant to section 97 of the IRPA.
II.
Facts
[2]
Kenia Kedesh Colin Villarroel (the principal applicant) and her two minor children, Alejandra Castillo Colin and Ana Sofia Colin Villarroel (all three together, the applicants], are citizens of Mexico.
[3]
In her Personal Information Form (PIF), the principal applicant stated that she fears Guillermo Rafael Jimenez Garcia, a very powerful officer in the Mexican army, who threatened, beat and abused her. The principal applicant's mother filed several complaints against the officer regarding his abusive behaviour toward her daughter; the officer was eventually transferred to another state. The principal applicant stated that she became pregnant in December 2005 and lost the baby in March 2006, a boy according to the death certificate. The principal applicant informed the officer about the pregnancy, and he continued harassing her. In December 2010, the officer allegedly attacked the principal applicant and was arrested. He purportedly also attempted to kidnap her daughters.
[4]
The applicants left Mexico on July 19, 2011, and stayed in the United States before entering Canada and claiming refugee protection on August 20, 2011.
[5]
Prior to the RPD hearing, the principal applicant submitted a new narrative. This hearing was held on June 6, 2013, and the principal applicant acted as the designated representative of her daughters. The applicants were represented by counsel.
III.
Impugned decision
[6]
The RPD was satisfied as to the applicants' identities, but rejected their claim due to contradictions, omissions and inconsistencies in the principal applicant's testimony. The principal applicant was not credible and did not establish a fear of persecution. She asked the RPD to set aside her original narrative in favour of a second version of the facts that she submitted by reason of her religious beliefs, which led her to correct some lies and exaggerations in her first narrative. The RPD noted an initial indication of the principal applicant's lack of credibility and told her she would nonetheless be asked about her first version of the facts.
[7]
In her second narrative, the principal applicant alleged that the officer forced her to have an abortion in 2003, whereas the original version mentioned the loss of a child in March 2006 (or, according to the death certificate, in February 2006). When asked about the circumstances surrounding these two pregnancies, the principal applicant was unable to satisfy the RPD of the truth of her allegations. Still with respect to the pregnancy, the principal applicant had stated in her initial narrative that she lost a male child, whereas the birth certificate does not specify the gender of the child, and the RPD rejected the principal applicant's explanations in that regard.
[8]
The RPD concluded that the principal applicant sought to amend her narrative for consistency with the other evidence filed on record, in other words, testimonies that contradicted her initial narrative.
[9]
Also, according to the second version of the narrative, the principal applicant's mother merely suspected the existence of a relationship between the principal applicant and her lover, but the evidence clearly shows that she did not only suspect this relationship; rather, she denounced its existence and had often taken steps against possible abuses of authority or the rape of her daughter.
[10]
The principal applicant also provided massively contradictory stories regarding the timing and circumstances of her last meeting with the officer.
[11]
Further, the RPD noted that the principal applicant stated that she had had the opportunity to travel to the United States more than ten times since 2008 for vacations, and that she had the opportunity to live there for a year with her father, who is a professor. This testimony was at variance with what was mentioned in her PIF. The RPD rejected the principal applicant's explanation regarding this inconsistency. According to the RPD, this behaviour demonstrated a lack of fear of persecution because, had the principal applicant actually feared persecution, she would not have returned to Mexico after each visit. She also failed to give satisfactory explanations and establish that her current fear of persecution is well-founded.
IV.
Applicants' arguments
[12]
The principal applicant pointed out that she voluntarily informed the RPD that she had submitted a second narrative and that the review of her claim should have been based on this second version. Given the discrepancies between the two narratives, it was clear that the RPD would identify contradictions, but it was not reasonable to discount the credibility of the principal applicant on the basis of the simple contradictions. Also, given the substance of certain questions, particularly those regarding the pregnancies, the RPD did not comply with
Guideline 4: Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution
. Lastly, the analysis of the fear of persecution is not reasonable considering the principal applicant's testimony.
V.
Respondent's arguments
[13]
The respondent asserts that the RPD decision is reasonable given that the panel from the outset informed the principal applicant that she would be questioned on her two narratives, and given that this Court has often held that the RPD is entitled to review the amendments an applicant has made to a PIF and to draw adverse credibility findings if important issues have been amended. The RPD was all the more justified in proceeding in such a way considering that counsel for the principal applicant made no objections at the hearing when questions were raised on the discrepancies between the two narratives. In this respect, the questions pertaining to the principal applicant's pregnancies were completely reasonable because they made it possible to highlight these discrepancies. The principal applicant rather calls upon this Court to reconsider the evidence and substitute its own opinion for that of the RPD, which is not at all within its jurisdiction. Despite the RPD's submission regarding credibility, the decision remains based on the other problems identified in the file, including the fact that the principal applicant failed to apply for asylum on her many visits to the United States.
VI.
Issue
[14]
Did the RPD err in finding the principal applicant to be not credible?
VII.
Standard of review
[15]
The RPD's credibility assessment is a question of fact that is reviewable on the standard of reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; see, for example:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 11, [2010] FCJ No. 768). This Court must consequently afford significant deference to the RPD's findings regarding the principal applicant's credibility.
VIII.
Analysis
[16]
For the reasons set out below, the RPD's decision is reasonable and does warrant intervention by this Court.
[17]
As the respondent quite aptly indicated, the RPD is entitled to review a claimant's PIF both before and after it is amended, and the decision-maker may draw negative inferences about the credibility of the claimant in the event that major contradictions are noted between the two versions (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 31, [2011] FCJ No. 644;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paras. 4 and 6]. Thus, although the principal applicant may dislike it, the RPD was correct to have considered both narratives, and the principal applicant's motivations in amending her narrative or the fact that she had asked the Court to consider only the second version do not at all change the RPD's rights in this respect.
[18]
The RPD thus identified several contradictions between the different narratives and the testimony of the principal applicant on essential elements of her claim. The following are some examples. In the second version of her narrative, the principal applicant states that her alleged aggressor forced her to have an abortion in 2003, whereas the initial narrative clearly states the loss of a child, but in 2006. The principal applicant also contradicted herself with respect to how she found out the gender of the child that she lost in 2006; according to one version, she was told by a nurse and, according to another version, she learned of it after consulting the death certificate (on which, moreover, the gender of the child is not indicated). The principal applicant also provided contradictory versions regarding what her mother knew of her relationship with her alleged aggressor and regarding what her mother tried to do to report possible attacks against her daughter. The principal applicant contradicted herself once more as to when her last physical contact or last meeting with her alleged aggressor occurred. Together, these major contradictions seriously undermine the principal claimant's credibility, especially since the contradictions identified relate directly to the allegations in support of the claim.
[19]
Considering these contradictions, it was reasonable for the RPD to reject the claim of the principal applicant by determining that she is not credible.
[20]
Further, having already rejected the principal applicant's credibility, the RPD was not required to consider the fear of persecution but nonetheless did so. Once again, inconsistencies and contradictions in the different versions of the principal applicant's story undermined her credibility, particularly with respect to the number of times that she visited the United States and why she took these trips. Moreover, the RPD was not satisfied with the explanations of the principal applicant on this topic, and, considering the overall finding that the principal applicant was not credible, it was reasonable for it to find as it did.
[21]
Consequently, because it is not the role of this Court to re-weigh the evidence presented (
Canada (Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2009] S.C.J. No. 12), I find the RPD's decision that the principal applicant was not credible in her testimony to be reasonable.
[22]
The parties were invited to submit a question for certification but no question was submitted.
ORDER
[23]
THE COURT ORDERS that
the application for judicial review is dismissed. No question is certified.
.........................
Kenia Kedesh Colin Villarroel, Alejandra Castillo Codin et Ana Sofia Colin Villarroel (partie demanderesse) v. Le Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration (partie défenderesse)
I.
Introduction
[1]
Le juge Noël
: Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch 27 [LIPR] à l'encontre de la décision rendue le 12 juin 2013 par Youssoupha Diop, commissaire de la Section de la protection des réfugiés [SPR] de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada [CISR], dans laquelle on concluait que les demanderesses ne sont ni des réfugiées au sens de la Convention pour l'application de l'article 96 de la LIPR, ni des personnes à protéger selon l'article 97 de la LIPR.
II.
Faits
[2]
Kenia Kedesh Colin Villarroel [la demanderesse principale] et ses deux enfants mineures, Alejandra Castillo Colin et Ana Sofia Colin Villarroel [les trois réunies, les demanderesses], sont citoyennes du Mexique.
[3]
Dans son formulaire de renseignements personnel [FRP], la demanderesse principale déclarait craindre Guillermo Rafael Jimenez Garcia, un officier très puissant de l'armée mexicaine qui la menaçait, la battait et la maltraitait. La mère de la demanderesse principale a déposé plusieurs plaintes contre l'officier pour les sévices contre sa fille et celui-ci a finalement été muté vers un autre État. La demanderesse principale a déclaré être tombée enceinte en décembre 2005 et avoir perdu le bébé en mars 2006, un garçon selon le certificat de décès. La demanderesse principale a informé l'officier de la grossesse et celui-ci a continué à la harceler. En décembre 2010, l'officier aurait attaqué la demanderesse principale et aurait été arrêté, il aurait également tenté d'enlever les filles de cette dernière.
[4]
Les demanderesses ont quitté le Mexique le 19 juillet 2011 et ont séjourné aux États-Unis avant d'entrer au Canada et d'y présenter une demande d'asile le 20 août 2011.
[5]
Avant l'audience devant la SPR, la demanderesse principale a déposé un nouveau récit narratif. Cette audience a eu lieu le 6 juin 2013, et la demanderesse principale a agi à titre de représentante désignée de ses filles, et les demanderesses y étaient représentées par un avocat.
III.
Décision contestée
[6]
La SPR s'est déclarée satisfaite de l'identité des demanderesses, mais elle a rejeté leur demande en raison des contradictions, des omissions et des incohérences du témoignage de la demanderesse principale. Cette dernière n'était pas crédible et n'a pas établi une crainte de persécution. Elle a demandé à la SPR d'écarter son récit narratif original au profit d'une seconde version des faits qu'elle a déposée en raison de ses convictions religieuses, qui l'ont poussée à corriger certains mensonges et certaines exagérations de son premier récit narratif. La SPR y a vu un premier indice du manque de crédibilité pour la demanderesse principale et a indiqué à cette dernière qu'elle allait tout de même la questionner sur sa première version des faits.
[7]
Dans son deuxième récit narratif, la demanderesse principale rapportait que l'officier l'aurait forcée à subir un avortement en 2003, tandis que la version originale faisait état de la perte d'un enfant en mars 2006 (ou, selon le certificat de décès, en février 2006). Questionnée au sujet des circonstances de ces deux grossesses, la demanderesse principale n'a pas su convaincre la SPR de la véracité de ses allégations. Toujours au sujet de la grossesse, la demanderesse principale avait affirmé dans son récit narratif initial avoir perdu un garçon de sexe masculin alors que l'acte de naissance ne précise pas le sexe de l'enfant, et la SPR a rejeté les explications de la demanderesse principale à cet égard.
[8]
La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse principale a souhaité modifier son récit narratif pour l'harmoniser avec d'autres pièces déposées au dossier, c'est-à-dire des témoignages qui contredisaient son récit narratif initial.
[9]
Aussi, selon la deuxième version du récit narratif, la mère de la demanderesse principale soupçonnait simplement l'existence d'une relation entre la demanderesse principale et son amoureux, mais la preuve démontre clairement qu'elle ne faisait pas que soupçonner cette relation; elle en dénonçait plutôt l'existence et elle avait souvent entrepris des démarches contre de possibles abus d'autorité ou de viols à l'égard de sa fille.
[10]
La demanderesse principale a également livré des versions vastement contradictoires quant au moment et aux circonstances de sa dernière rencontre avec l'officier.
[11]
En outre, la SPR a noté que la demanderesse principale a affirmé avoir eu l'occasion de se rendre aux États-Unis plus de 10 fois depuis 2008, notamment pour des vacances, et qu'elle a eu l'occasion d'y demeurer pendant un an avec son père, qui est professeur. Ce témoignage différait de ce qui était mentionné dans son FRP. La SPR a rejeté l'explication de la demanderesse principale au sujet de cette incohérence. Selon la SPR, ce comportement faisait montre d'une absence de crainte de persécution puisque la demanderesse principale, avait-elle réellement eu une crainte de persécution, ne serait pas revenue au Mexique après chaque visite, et la demanderesse principale n'a pas su donner des explications convaincantes et établir le bien-fondé de sa crainte actuelle de persécution.
IV.
Arguments des demanderesses
[12]
La demanderesse principale rappelle qu'elle a volontairement informé la SPR qu'elle avait soumis un deuxième récit narratif et que l'examen de sa demande devait se faire en fonction de cette seconde version. Compte tenu des changements entre les deux récits narratifs, il était évident que la SPR y trouverait des contradictions, mais il n'était pas raisonnable de rejeter la crédibilité de la demanderesse principale sur la base de ces simples contradictions. Aussi, de par la teneur de certaines questions, notamment au sujet des grossesses, la SPR n'a pas respecté les
Directives no 4 - Revendicatrices du statut de réfugié craignant d'être persécutées en raison de leur sexe
. Enfin, l'analyse de la crainte de persécution est déraisonnable compte tenu du témoignage de la demanderesse principale.
V.
Arguments du défendeur
[13]
Le défendeur estime que la décision de la SPR est raisonnable dans la mesure où le tribunal a d'emblée informé la demanderesse principale qu'elle allait être questionnée au sujet de ses deux récits narratifs et où la présente Cour a souvent conclu que la SPR est habilitée à examiner les modifications apportées à un FRP par un demandeur et à tirer des conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité si d'importantes questions ont été modifiées. La SPR était d'autant plus justifiée de procéder de la sorte étant donné que l'avocat de la demanderesse principale n'a soulevé aucune objection à l'audience lorsque des questions ont été posées sur les divergences entre les deux récits narratifs. À cet égard, les questions relatives aux grossesses de la demanderesse principale étaient tout à fait raisonnables puisqu'elles permettaient justement de mettre en évidence ces divergences. La demanderesse principale invite plutôt la présente Cour à procéder à un nouvel examen de la preuve et à substituer sa propre opinion à celle de la SPR, ce qui ne relève aucunement de sa compétence. En dépit de l'argument de la SPR sur la crédibilité, toutefois, la décision demeure fondée en raison des autres problèmes relevés dans le dossier, notamment le fait que la demanderesse principale a omis de revendiquer l'asile lors de ses nombreuses visites aux États-Unis.
VI.
Question en litige
[14]
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la demanderesse principale n'était pas crédible?
VII.
Norme de contrôle
[15]
L'évaluation de la crédibilité par la SPR est une question de fait qui appelle à un contrôle suivant la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; voir par exemple
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2010] ACF no 768). La présente Cour devra donc accorder une grande déférence aux conclusions de la SPR concernant la crédibilité de la demanderesse principale.
VIII.
Analyse
[16]
Pour les motifs exposés ci-dessous, la décision de la SPR est raisonnable et ne justifie pas l'intervention de la Cour.
[17]
Comme l'a très justement indiqué le défendeur, la SPR est en droit d'examiner le FRP d'un demandeur tant avant qu'après que la modification de celui-ci, et le décideur peut en effet tirer des conclusions négatives sur le plan de crédibilité du demandeur dans l'éventualité où de grandes contradictions seraient observées entre les deux versions (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2011] ACF no 644;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 6). Ainsi, n'en déplaise à la demanderesse principale, c'est à bon droit que la SPR a tenu compte des deux récits narratifs, et les motivations de la demanderesse principale pour modifier son récit narratif ou encore le fait que celle-ci ait invité la Cour à ne tenir compte que de la seconde version ne changent en rien les droits de la SPR à cet égard.
[18]
La SPR a donc relevé plusieurs contradictions entre les différentes versions de récits narratifs et le témoignage de la demanderesse principale portant sur des éléments essentiels de sa demande. Notons les exemples suivants. Dans la deuxième version de son récit narratif, la demanderesse principale prétend qu'elle aurait été forcée par son présumé agresseur à subir un avortement en 2003, tandis que le récit narratif initial fait bel et bien état de la perte d'un enfant, mais en 2006. La demanderesse principale s'est également contredite quant à la façon dont elle avait appris le sexe de l'enfant qu'elle a perdu en 2006; selon une version, elle l'aurait appris de la bouche d'une infirmière et, selon une autre version, elle l'aurait su après avoir consulté le certificat de décès (sur lequel, par ailleurs, le sexe de l'enfant ne figure pas). La demanderesse principale a également livré des versions contradictoires en ce qui concerne ce que sa mère savait de sa relation avec son présumé agresseur et sur ce qu'elle a tenté de faire pour dénoncer d'éventuelles agressions contre sa fille. La demanderesse principale s'est une fois de plus contredite relativement à quand remonte son dernier contact physique ou sa dernière rencontre avec son présumé agresseur. Réunies, ces importantes contradictions portent gravement atteinte à la crédibilité de la demanderesse principale d'autant plus que les contradictions relevées concernent directement les allégations à l'appui de la demande.
[19]
Compte tenu de ces contradictions, il était raisonnable pour la SPR de rejeter la demande de la demanderesse principale en concluant que cette dernière n'avait pas de crédibilité.
[20]
En outre, ayant déjà rejeté la crédibilité de la demanderesse principale, la SPR n'était pas tenue d'examiner la crainte de persécution, mais elle s'est néanmoins livrée à l'exercice. Encore une fois, des incohérences et des contradictions dans les différentes versions de l'histoire de la demanderesse principale sont venues miner sa crédibilité, notamment en ce qui a trait au nombre de fois qu'elle a visité les États-Unis et les raisons pour lesquelles elle a fait ces voyages. D'ailleurs, la SPR n'a pas été convaincue des explications de la demanderesse principale à ce sujet et, compte tenu de la conclusion générale selon laquelle la demanderesse principale n'est pas crédible, il était raisonnable pour elle de conclure ainsi.
[21]
Par conséquent, puisqu'il ne revient pas à la présente Cour de soupeser de nouveau la preuve présentée (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2009] ACS no 12), j'estime que la décision de la SPR concluant que la demanderesse principale n'était pas crédible dans son témoignage est raisonnable.
[22]
Les parties ont été invitées à soumettre une question aux fins de certification, mais aucune ne fut proposée.
ORDONNANCE
[23]
LA COUR ORDONNE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]