 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Ravindra Priyashantha Watudura Bandanage ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 1340)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Near, J.
November 20, 2012.
Counsel:
Lorne Waldman, for the applicant;
Nimanthika Kaneira and Gregory George, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Waldman & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Near, J.
: The Applicant seeks judicial review of the February 2, 2012, decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the Board")in which the Board determined that the Applicant was excluded from protection under sections 96 and 97 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (IRPA) on the basis of Article 1(F)(a) of the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Schedule to IRPA (the Convention).
[2]
For the reasons that follow, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
I.
Facts
[3]
The Applicant is a Sri Lankan citizen of Sinhalese ethnicity. He arrived in Canada on October 22, 2009, on a 30-day visitor's visa, and submitted his refugee claim on November 2, 2009, on the basis of his fear of the police and other government forces as a result of his exposing corruption in the Sri Lankan government.
[4]
The Applicant was a commissioned officer in the Sri Lankan army from 1993 to 2009. The Applicant's hearing before the Board related entirely to the question of exclusion from refugee protection on the basis of his potential complicity in the Sri Lankan army's commission of crimes against humanity throughout the course of the country's civil war.
[5]
While the Applicant recounted in his Personal Information Form (PIF) that he joined the army to serve his country, he later testified that he joined the army so as to allow him to pursue his athletic career. The Applicant is an international Wushu (kung fu) champion, and an internationally certified Wushu coach. He competed in many competitions around the world, and also played rugby for a military team. He held a leadership role within the military athletics program.
II.
Decision under Review
[6]
The Board identified that the "reasonable grounds to believe" standard of proof applies to questions of fact in exclusion cases, citing the Supreme Court of Canada case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as authority. It further established that there was a two-part test in exclusion cases for crimes against humanity: first, whether there are serious reasons to believe that crimes against humanity have taken place during a certain historical period; and second, whether the Minister has demonstrated that there are serious reasons to believe that a claimant was complicit in those crimes against humanity (Application Record at page 15).
[7]
The Board determined that, in the period the Applicant was in the army, the Sri Lankan military forces committed countless crimes against humanity, including"ongoing widespread and systematic attacks on the civilian population." The Board noted that, while the Applicant stated that he was not aware of the commission of crimes against humanity before he joined the army, the Applicant testified that he was aware that civilians had been tortured and other crimes against humanity committed after he joined.
[8]
The Board then considered whether the Applicant was complicit in committing crimes against humanity, because there was insufficient evidence to find that he directly committed any such crimes. It applied the "personal and knowing participation" test, identifying that a finding of complicity necessarily entailed examining whether the claimant shared in a common purpose with those who ordered or committed the crimes against humanity. Citing the Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 1052, the Board noted that, to find complicity, personal knowledge of the crimes and an intention to contribute to their commission was required. The Board further identified the following factors that inform whether the Applicant possessed the culpable mental state to be deemed to have shared in the common purpose of the crime:
• Method of recruitment;
• Nature of organization;
• Length of time in organization;
• Position and rank in organization;
• Opportunity to leave organization; and
• Knowledge of atrocities.
[9]
The Board assessed each factor in turn. First, the Board remarked that the Applicant had joined the army voluntarily for an initial term of seven years. The Board did not find credible the Applicant's claim to have deserted the army for two years, between 1999 and 2001. It based its credibility finding on inconsistencies between the sworn applications submitted by the Applicant, including his PIF, and his oral testimony at the hearings, as well as on the insufficient corroborative evidence to support his claim. Specifically, the Board noted that the Applicant had seven months between the hearings to procure documentation to support his claim of desertion, and came up only with a single document that was rife with mistakes. As a result, the Board found that the claimant voluntarily renewed his commitment to the military after the initial seven-year period until he made his claim for refugee protection in Canada on November 2, 2009.
[10]
Second, the Board determined that, while the Sri Lankan armed forces were not an organization devoted to a single brutal purpose, they were an institution that"systematically committed human rights abuses against civilians during the course of its civil war with the LTTE" (Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam). It found on the reasonable grounds to believe standard that the military forces, including the Applicant's division, were broadly responsible for crimes against humanity in the period in which the Applicant was in service.
[11]
Third, the Board stated that the Applicant served in the army for almost sixteen years.
[12]
Fourth, the Board assessed the Applicant's position and rank in the Sri Lankan armed forces. It noted that the Applicant was a commissioned officer for the entire duration of his service, and that he became a captain in 2003, a rank that is three from the bottom of the ranks of a commissioned officer. The Board canvassed the Applicant's training in weapon use, combat, military tactics and counter insurgency. The Board determined that the Applicant had participated in combat from 1995 to 1999, as the Applicant had indicated this occurrence on his PIF and, despite later attempts to distance himself from this statement, the Applicant had not once amended his PIF to correct this alleged mistake. The Board further concluded that the Applicant had been asked to lead men into combat in 1999, though the claimant never admitted to leading soldiers into combat.
[13]
The Board concluded that the Applicant physically mapped LTTE attacks and cordon and search operations on a map of Colombo in the time that he served there, between 2005 and 2008. While he claims never to have gone on one of these missions, the Applicant assisted in them by ensuring that there was adequate food for the soldiers on the mission, and by ordering the transportation necessary for the missions. The Board determined that the Applicant was a trusted officer, given the role he played and the fact that he was asked to place a bomb at the home of a Tamil Member of Parliament. Finally, the Board determined that the Applicant's work on an exhibition celebrating the army's 60th anniversary and the "victory" accomplished by General Fonseca in the civil war was a glorification of the army's many crimes against humanity.
[14]
Fifth, the Board determined that there was no credible evidence that the Applicant explored leaving the army at the end of his initial seven-year term. The documentary evidence indicated that military officers could leave their service early, provided that they repaid the army for training costs. Additionally, the Board pointed out that the Applicant benefited in many ways by remaining an officer: he was paid well; he was permitted to practise his athletic pursuits, competing in competitions all around the world; and he acquired post-graduate credentials.
[15]
Finally, the Board concluded that the Applicant had knowledge of the atrocities committed by the military forces. The Applicant had acknowledged in his testimony that he knew the army tortured persons, that some soldiers were raping civilians, and that arrested persons were beaten. Additionally, the Board pointed to the Applicant's personal participation in mapping the cordon and search missions in Colombo, also noting that the Applicant was handed the names of Tamils who were apprehended in these missions. The Board also relied on the Applicant's work to display General Fonseca's exploits during the war in the post-war exhibition.
[16]
The Applicant's participation in combat, the expectation that he would lead men into battle, the fact that he was asked to bomb an elected official's home, his knowledge of the atrocities committed by the Sri Lankan army, and his continuous re-enlistment in military service gave the Board reasonable grounds to believe that the claimant was complicit in crimes against humanity during his service in the Sri Lankan army.
III.
Issues
[17]
The sole issue raised in this application is whether the Board's complicity determination was reasonable.
IV.
Standard of Review
[18]
Whether the facts of a given case give rise to a finding of complicity in crimes against humanity is a question of mixed fact and law. As such, complicity findings are owed substantial deference, and are reviewable on the reasonableness standard ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 39;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 632 at para 11;
Canada (Minister of Public Safety and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] FCJ No 718 at para 30).
[19]
Reasonableness is concerned "mostly with the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process. But it is also concerned with whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 47).
V.
Analysis
[20]
The parties do not contest that the Board applied the correct test for complicity, rather they disagree as to whether its application of the test to the facts was unreasonable. The Applicant specifically posits that the Board failed to explain its conclusion that he was complicit; that there were was an insufficient nexus between the Applicant and any specific crimes; and that the connection between the Applicant and war crimes was too remote.
[21]
It is well-established that findings of complicity are highly dependent on the specific facts of each case. This Court has further established several guiding principles over the years for what constitutes complicity for the purposes of paragraph 1F(a) of the Convention. For example, it is a broad concept that is not limited to physical participation in crimes or the exercise of effective control over their commission ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 54). A complicity finding requires "personal and knowing participation" or toleration of the crimes (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1992 CarswellNat 94 at para 15;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 54).
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> s follows:
[6] As I understand the jurisprudence, it is that a person who is a member of the persecuting group and who has knowledge that activities are being committed by the group and who neither take steps to prevent them occurring (if he has the power to do so) nor disengages himself from the group at the earliest opportunity (consistent with safety for himself) but who lends his active support to the group will be considered to be an accomplice. A shared common purpose will be considered to exist. I note that the situation envisaged by this jurisprudence is not one in which isolated incidents of international offences have occurred but where the commission of such offences is a continuous and regular part of the operation.
[23]
Given the jurisprudence on this question, I am satisfied that the Board's approach to, and conclusions in respect of, exclusion in this case were reasonable. The Board applied the facts as it saw them to the six criteria it drew from the case law - an application that the Applicant does not contest. It was open to the Board to find that a combination of all of the factors led to a determination that the Applicant shared a common purpose with the Sri Lankan army, an organization that undisputedly committed crimes against humanity during the time in which the Applicant carried out his military service.
[24]
The Board pointed to the Applicant's voluntary enlistment in the army, and his voluntary renewal of his service for almost sixteen years. It was reasonably open to the Board to find that the Applicant had not deserted the army during the period he claimed, given the inconsistencies in the record and the mistakes on the document submitted in support of this claim. The Board further identified that the Applicant had participated in cordon and search missions by mapping them and being handed lists of Tamils captured in the missions, and had been involved in combat during his service in the Sri Lankan military at times when the Applicant was aware that atrocities were being committed. The Board also determined that the Applicant held a position of trust in the army, being asked to bomb an elected official's home (though he purportedly never carried this act out) and mapping the cordon and search missions. It was well within the Board's expertise to weigh these factors and come to its conclusion that the Applicant was complicit. I am satisfied that this evaluation constitutes a sufficient explanation of the Board's finding, and, furthermore, that the conclusion falls within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes.
[25]
I note that the Applicant seeks to certify the same question that was certified in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, namely, and as reframed by the Federal Court of Appeal at para 44:
For the purposes of exclusion pursuant to paragraph 1F(a) of the United Nations Refugee Convention, can complicity by association in crimes against humanity be established by the fact that the refugee claimant was a senior public servant in a government that committed such crimes, along with the fact that the refugee claimant was aware of these crimes and remained in his position without denouncing them?
[26]
The Federal Court of Appeal answered this question in the affirmative, stating that "a senior official may, by remaining in his or her position without protest and continuing to defend the interests of his or her government while being aware of the crimes committed by this government demonstrate 'personal and knowing participation'in these crimes and be complicit with the government in their commission" ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 72). As I am bound by, and agree with, this current statement of the law on such matters, I will not certify the question as suggested by the Applicant.
VI.
Conclusion
[27]
I find that the Board's conclusions with respect to the Applicant's complicity in committing crimes against humanity are defensible in respect of the facts and law and, as such, its exclusion of the Applicant from refugee protection on the basis of paragraph 1F(a) of the Convention is reasonable.
JUDGMENT
[28]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. this application for judicial review is dismissed; and
2. no question of general importance is certified.
.........................
Ravindra Priyashantha Watudura Bandanage (alias  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeur sollicite le contrôle judiciaire de la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Commission), datée du 2 février 2012, par laquelle la Commission a conclu que le demandeur était exclu de la protection prévue aux articles 96 et 97 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la LIPR), et ce, par application de l'alinéa
a
) de la section F de l'article premier de la Convention des Nations Unies relative au statut des réfugiés, dont le texte est annexé à la LIPR (la Convention).
[2]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
I.
Les faits
[3]
Le demandeur est un citoyen du Sri Lanka d'origine ethnique cingalaise. Il est arrivé au Canada le 22 octobre 2009, muni d'un visa de visiteur valide pour 30 jours, et il a soumis sa demande d'asile le 2 novembre 2009 parce qu'il a peur que la police et d'autres forces gouvernementales s'en prennent à lui parce qu'il a dénoncé la corruption qui sévit dans le gouvernement sri-lankais.
[4]
Entre 1993 et 2009, le demandeur a été officier commissionné dans l'armée sri-lankaise. L'audience du demandeur devant la Commission a porté entièrement sur la question de l'exclusion de la protection en raison de la possible participation du demandeur à des crimes contre l'humanité perpétrés par l'armée sri-lankaise au cours de la guerre civile qui a sévi dans le pays.
[5]
Le demandeur a rapporté dans son formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRF) qu'il s'était enrôlé dans l'armée afin de servir son pays, mais il a plus tard affirmé dans son témoignage qu'il s'était enrôlé dans l'armée afin de poursuivre sa carrière d'athlète. Le demandeur est un champion international de wushu (kung fu). Il est également un entraîneur de wushu détenant une certification internationale. Il a participé à plusieurs compétitions partout dans le monde et il a également joué au rugby dans une équipe de l'armée. Il jouait un rôle clé au sein du programme d'athlétisme de l'armée.
II.
La décision faisant l'objet du présent contrôle
[6]
La Commission a souligné que, en matière d'exclusion, c'est la norme de preuve des« motifs raisonnables de croire » qui s'applique aux questions de fait. Elle a cité à l'appui la décision rendue par la Cour suprême du  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Elle a de plus établi qu'il existe un critère à deux volets dans les cas d'exclusion pour crimes contre l'humanité: premièrement, il faut se demander s'il y a des raisons sérieuses de penser que des crimes contre l'humanité ont été commis au cours d'une certaine période historique; deuxièmement, il faut se demander si le ministre a démontré qu'il y a des raisons sérieuses de penser que le demandeur d'asile a participé à ces crimes contre l'humanité (dossier de la demande, à la page 15).
[7]
La Commission a conclu que, dans la période au cours de laquelle le demandeur était dans l'armée, les forces armées sri-lankaises ont commis d'innombrables crimes contre l'humanité, y compris des « attaques continues généralisées et systématiques contre la population civile ». La Commission a souligné que le demandeur a déclaré qu'il ne savait pas que des crimes contre l'humanité avaient été commis avant de s'enrôler dans l'armée, mais qu'il a affirmé dans son témoignage qu'il savait que des civils avaient été torturés et que d'autres crimes contre l'humanité avaient été commis après qu'il se soit enrôlé.
[8]
La Commission s'est ensuite demandé si le demandeur s'était rendu complice de crimes contre l'humanité parce qu'il n'y avait pas assez d'éléments de preuve permettant de conclure qu'il a commis directement des crimes de cette nature. Elle a appliqué le critère de la « participation personnelle et consciente », et a affirmé que, pour conclure à la complicité, il fallait nécessairement se demander si le demandeur d'asile poursuivait un objectif commun avec ceux qui avaient ordonné la perpétration des crimes contre l'humanité ou qui avaient commis les crimes contre l'humanité. Renvoyant à la décision rendue par la Cour d'appel fédérale dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no1052, la Commission a souligné que, pour conclure à la complicité, il faut établir qu'il y a eu connaissance personnelle des crimes et qu'il y a eu une intention de contribuer à leur perpétration. La Commission a de plus relevé les facteurs suivants qui indiquent si le demandeur possédait l'élément moral requis pour être considéré comme ayant partagé l'objectif du crime:
• Méthode de recrutement;
• Nature de l'organisation;
• Durée de la participation aux activités de l'organisation;
• Poste et rang de la personne dans l'organisation;
• Possibilité de quitter l'organisation;
• Connaissance des atrocités commises.
[9]
La Commission a examiné chacun de ces facteurs à tour de rôle. Premièrement, la Commission a souligné que le demandeur s'était enrôlé dans l'armée de son plein gré pour une durée initiale de sept ans. La Commission n'a pas cru le demandeur lorsqu'il a prétendu avoir déserté l'armée pendant deux ans, à savoir entre 1999 et 2001. Elle a fondé sa conclusion sur la crédibilité sur l'existence de contradictions entre les demandes sous serment soumises par le demandeur, y compris son FRP, et son témoignage aux audiences, ainsi que sur le nombre insuffisant d'éléments de preuve étayant sa prétention. Plus précisément, la Commission a souligné que le demandeur avait disposé de sept mois entre les audiences pour se procurer des documents prouvant qu'il avait déserté et n'a produit qu'un seul document, lequel était rempli d'erreurs. Par conséquent, la Commission a conclu que le demandeur avait volontairement renouvelé son engagement dans l'armée après la période initiale de sept ans et poursuivi son service militaire jusqu'à ce qu'il présente sa demande d'asile au Canada le 2 novembre 2009.
[10]
Deuxièmement, la Commission a conclu que, bien que l'armée sri-lankaise n'était pas une organisation dont la seule raison d'être était de perpétrer des actes de brutalité, mais elle constituait une organisation qui a commis, « de manière systématique, des violations des droits de la personne contre des civils pendant la guerre civile qui l'opposait aux TLET » (Tigres de libération de l'Eelam tamoul). Elle a conclu, selon la norme des motifs raisonnables de croire, que les forces armées, y compris la division à laquelle appartenait le demandeur, étaient largement responsables des crimes contre l'humanité qui ont été perpétrés pendant la période où le demandeur d'asile était militaire.
[11]
Troisièmement, la Commission a déclaré que le demandeur était resté dans l'armée pendant presque seize ans.
[12]
Quatrièmement, la Commission s'est penchée sur la question du poste et du rang occupés par le demandeur dans l'armée sri-lankaise. Elle a souligné que le demandeur a été officier commissionné dans l'armée sri-lankaise pendant toute la durée de son service militaire et qu'il a atteint le grade de capitaine en 2003, et que deux rangs séparent ce grade du dernier rang des officiers commissionnés. La Commission a examiné minutieusement la formation suivie par le demandeur en manipulation d'armes, en façon de diriger des soldats et en application de tactiques militaires et en lutte contre-insurrection. La Commission a conclu que le demandeur avait participé à des combats de 1995 à 1999, car c'est ce que celui-ci avait mentionné dans son FRP et que, malgré que celui-ci ait par la suite prétendu que ce renseignement était erroné, il n'a apporté aucune correction à son FRP. La Commission a de plus conclu qu'il avait été demandé au demandeur de diriger des hommes au combat en 1999; le demandeur n'a cependant jamais admis avoir dirigé des hommes au combat.
[13]
La Commission a conclu que, alors qu'il combattait dans la région de Colombo entre 2005 et 2008, le demandeur, sur une carte de Colombo, avait tracé physiquement les attaques des TLET et cartographié les opérations de fouille et de ratissage de l'armée. Même s'il prétend qu'il n'a jamais participé à ces missions, le demandeur s'assurait que les soldats disposaient de suffisamment de nourriture et, au besoin, il réservait les camions, les jeeps ou les autobus nécessaires pour ces missions. La Commission a conclu que le demandeur détenait un poste de confiance, compte tenu du rôle qu'il jouait et compte tenu du fait qu'on lui avait demandé de placer une bombe à la résidence d'un député tamoul. Enfin, la Commission a conclu que le travail effectué par le demandeur relativement à une exposition soulignant le 60e anniversaire de l'armée et la« victoire » obtenue par le général Fonseca dans le cadre de la guerre civile était une célébration des crimes contre l'humanité commis par l'armée.
[14]
Cinquièmement, la Commission a conclu qu'il n'existait aucun élément de preuve crédible indiquant que le demandeur avait réellement tenté d'abandonner l'armée au terme de ses sept premières années de service. Selon la preuve documentaire, les officiers pouvaient quitter l'armée avant le temps prévu, mais ils devaient rembourser l'armée pour les frais de formation encourus. De plus, la Commission a souligné que le fait d'être un officier de l'armée a apporté beaucoup d'avantages au demandeur: il était bien rémunéré, il était autorisé à participer à des compétitions athlétiques partout dans le monde et il a pu faire des études supérieures et obtenir un certificat.
[15]
Enfin, la Conclusion a conclu que le demandeur était au courant que des atrocités étaient commises par l'armée. Le demandeur a reconnu dans son témoignage qu'il était au courant que l'armée torturait des personnes, que des soldats violaient des femmes civiles et que des personnes arrêtées étaient battues. De plus, la Commission a souligné que, en cartographiant les opérations de fouille et de ratissage de l'armée à Colombo, le demandeur était personnellement impliqué. Elle a également souligné qu'on avait remis au demandeur le nom des Tamouls qui avaient été arrêtés pendant ces opérations. La Commission a également souligné le travail effectué par le demandeur dans le cadre de l'exposition visant à souligner les exploits accomplis par le général Fonseca au cours de la guerre.
[16]
La participation du demandeur à des combats, le fait qu'il devait mener des hommes au combat, le fait qu'on lui a demandé de faire exploser la résidence d'un député, le fait qu'il a eu connaissance des atrocités qui ont été commises par l'armée sri-lankaise et le fait qu'il a continué à servir dans l'armée ont donné à la Commission des motifs raisonnables de croire que le demandeur s'était rendu complice de crimes contre l'humanité pendant qu'il effectuait son service dans l'armée sri-lankaise.
III.
Les questions en litige
[17]
L'unique question soulevée dans la présente demande est celle qui consiste à savoir si la conclusion de complicité tirée par la Commission était raisonnable.
IV.
La norme de contrôle
[18]
La question de savoir si les faits de l'espèce peuvent donner lieu à une conclusion de complicité à des crimes contre l'humanité est une question mixte de fait et de droit. À ce titre, les conclusions de complicité appellent une retenue considérable et sont contrôlables selon la norme de la décision raisonnable ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 39;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 632, au paragraphe 11;
Canada (Ministre de la Sécurité publique et de la Protection civile) c Muro
, 2008 CF 566, [2008] ACF no 718, au paragraphe 30).
[19]
Le caractère raisonnable tient « principalement à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 47).
V.
Analyse
[20]
Les parties ne contestent pas que la Commission a appliqué le critère qu'il convient d'appliquer pour déterminer s'il y a eu complicité. Elles ne s'entendent cependant pas quant à savoir si la Commission a appliqué de façon déraisonnable le critère aux faits. Le demandeur soutient en particulier que la Commission n'a pas expliqué sa conclusion selon laquelle il était complice, que le lien entre lui et un quelconque crime était insuffisant et que le lien entre lui et des crimes de guerre était trop ténu.
[21]
Il est bien établi que les conclusions de complicité dépendent beaucoup des faits propres à chaque espèce. La Cour a de plus établi de nombreux principes directeurs au fil des ans sur ce qui constitue de la complicité aux fins de l'alinéa
a
) de la section F de l'article premier de la Convention, comme, par exemple, qu'il s'agit d'un concept large qui ne se limite pas à la participation physique aux crimes ou à l'exercice d'un contrôle effectif sur leur perpétration ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 54). Une conclusion de complicité exige que l'on participe « personnellement et sciemment » aux activités criminelles ou qu'on les tolère (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1992 CarswellNat 94, au paragraphe 15;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 54).
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[6] Selon mon interprétation de la jurisprudence, sera considéré comme complice quiconque fait partie du groupe persécuteur, qui a connaissance des actes accomplis par ce groupe, et qui ne prend pas de mesures pour les empêcher (s'il peut le faire) ni ne se dissocie du groupe à la première occasion (compte tenu de sa propre sécurité), mais qui l'appuie activement. On voit là une intention commune. Je fais remarquer que la jurisprudence susmentionnée ne vise pas des infractions internationales isolées, mais la situation où la perpétration de ces infractions fait continûment et régulièrement partie de l'opération.
[23]
Compte tenu de la jurisprudence sur cette question, je suis convaincu que l'approche de la Commission envers l'exclusion, en l'espèce, et les conclusions qu'elle a tirées relativement à celle-ci étaient raisonnables. La Commission a appliqué les faits, tels qu'elle les a constatés, aux six critères qu'elle a tirés de la jurisprudence et cette façon de faire n'est pas contestée par le demandeur. Il était loisible à la Commission de conclure qu'une combinaison de l'ensemble des facteurs a mené à la conclusion que le demandeur partageait un objectif commun avec l'armée sri-lankaise, une organisation qui a incontestablement commis des crimes contre l'humanité à l'époque où le demandeur a fait son service militaire.
[24]
La Commission a souligné que le demandeur s'était enrôlé de son plein gré dans l'armée et avait volontairement renouvelé son engagement pendant presque seize ans. Il était raisonnablement loisible à la Commission de conclure que le demandeur n'avait pas déserté l'armée au cours de la période pendant laquelle il prétend l'avoir fait, compte tenu des contradictions figurant au dossier et des erreurs contenues dans le document soumis à l'appui de cette prétention. La Commission a de plus relevé que le demandeur avait participé à des opérations de fouille et de ratissage en les cartographiant et en recevant des listes des Tamouls capturés lors de ces opérations et qu'il avait participé à des combats lors de son service dans l'armée sri-lankaise a des moments où il savait que des atrocités étaient commises. La Commission a également conclu que le demandeur occupait un poste de confiance dans l'armée, car on lui avait demandé de faire sauter la maison d'un député (acte qu'il n'a censément jamais commis) et qu'il avait cartographié les opérations de fouille et de ratissage. La Commission était tout à fait compétente pour apprécier ces facteurs et tirer sa conclusion voulant que le demandeur était complice. Je suis convaincu que cette évaluation constitue une explication suffisante quant à la conclusion de la Commission et que, de plus, que la conclusion appartient aux issues possibles acceptables.
[25]
Je souligne que le demandeur demande la certification de la même question qui a été certifiée dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, à savoir la question suivante telle que reformulée par la Cour d'appel fédérale au paragraphe 44:
Aux fins de l'exclusion prévue au paragraphe 1F
a
) de la Convention des Nations Unies relative au statut des réfugiés, peut-il y avoir complicité par association à des crimes contre l'humanité du fait qu'un demandeur d'asile occupait un poste de haut fonctionnaire auprès d'un gouvernement qui a commis de tels crimes, joint au fait que le demandeur d'asile avait connaissance de ces crimes et est demeuré en poste sans les dénoncer?
[26]
La Cour d'appel fédérale a répondu à cette question par l'affirmative. Elle a déclaré qu'« un haut dirigeant, en demeurant en poste sans protêt et en continuant à défendre les intérêts de son gouvernement alors qu'il a connaissance des crimes commis par ce gouvernement, peut démontrer sa "participation personnelle et consciente" à ces crimes et se rendre complice de son gouvernement dans leur commission » [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 72]. Comme je suis lié par l'état actuel du droit sur ces questions, auquel je souscris, je ne certifierai pas la question proposée par le demandeur.
VI.
Conclusion
[27]
Je conclus que les conclusions de la Commission concernant la complicité du demandeur à la perpétration de crimes contre l'humanité peuvent se justifier au regard des faits et du droit et, à ce titre, l'exclusion du demandeur de la catégorie des demandeurs d'asile par application de l'alinéa
a
) de la section F de l'article premier de la Convention est raisonnable.
JUGEMENT
[28]
LA COUR STATUE que
:
1. la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée;
2. aucune question de portée générale n'est certifiée.
[End of document]