[1]
Simpson, J.
: This is an application by Altaf Hussain Syed (the "applicant") for judicial review of a decision (the "Decision") of a visa officer (the "officer") in Rome. The decision is dated February 1, 1996, and it refused the applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada.
The Facts:
[2]
The applicant, a citizen of India, was born on June 1, 1956. He has a wife and three dependent children. The applicant graduated with a bachelor of commerce degree in 1986. Prior to receiving this degree, he worked in India in the field of accounts and administration. After graduation, he held the position of chief accounts coordinator for an Indian company.
[3]
In his application for permanent residence, the applicant listed assets of $17,000.00 and $4,000.00 in jewelry. The $4,000.00 in jewelry was also listed as an asset on his wife's application form. On October 5, 1995, the applicant applied for permanent residence as an assisted relative. His intended occupation was stated to be bookkeeper.
[4]
On January 31, 1996, the applicant and his wife attended at the Canadian Embassy in Rome for an interview before the officer. During the interview, the applicant admitted that he made no effort to keep himself current in his profession. In particular, he had not investigated the use of computers in bookkeeping. The officer expressed concern that this approach betrayed a lack of motivation and professional adaptability. The applicant responded that he was too busy to investigate new methods of bookkeeping.
[5]
The applicant also informed the officer that he had no assets. He did not mention the jewelry, but said that the $17,000.00 listed on his application form represented a loan from a relative already living in Canada.
[6]
The officer expressed to the applicant his concern that the applicant had failed to amass any savings during his fairly long work history and he stated that this reflected poorly on the applicant's resourcefulness, initiative and motivation. The applicant replied that he had used all his money on family expenses and that his relative in Canada would look after his family.
[7]
In light of the officer's concern, the applicant was awarded four units for personal suitability. In his letter dated February 1, 1996, containing the decision, the officer made the following assessment of the applicant's personal suitability.
"In reaching the above assessment, I took into account your statement during your selection interview on January 31, 1996, that despite over 23 years in the workforce you had no savings and no assets whatsoever. You will recall that during your interview, I expressed to you my serious concern that lack of any assets appear to reflect an absence of motivation, resourcefulness and initiative on your part. I provided you with an opportunity to disabuse me of this concern. You responded that your brother would provide financially for you. I reminded you that my concern arose from an assessment of your own personal suitability, not that of your relative (whose offer of assistance had already been acknowledged by a five point bonus). I expressed to you my continued concern and advised you that my concern would be reflected in your score for personal suitability."
The Issues:
[8]
Against this background, the following three issues arise:
1. Did the officer err when he considered the applicant's failure to investigate computerized bookkeeping as a relevant matter in the assessment of personal suitability?
2. Did the officer err when he considered the applicant's failure to amass any assets as a relevant matter in the assessment of personal suitability?
3. Did the officer err when he made his decision before he received: (1) confirmation of the applicant's brother's identity and citizenship; and (2) confirmation of the brother's bank deposit of $17,000.00 for the applicant's use as settlement funds?
Issue 1:
[9]
The applicant admitted during the interview that he had made no effort to keep himself current in his profession and that he had not investigated the benefits computers might bring to his trade. However, the applicant's counsel argued, based on the decision of Reed, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) (hereinafter " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "), that, if computer skills are not required by the C.C.D.O. occupation description, they should not be considered under personal suitability, because it would be unfair to do so when an applicant has no notice of the requirement.
[10]
It is my view, however, that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> does not apply in this case. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicant had a wide variety of computer skills and was faulted for unfamiliarity with a particular type of software. Here, in contrast, the applicant was not questioned about his skills or even expected to have any. He was only asked if he had made inquiries about the use of computers in his occupation. I find this to be an entirely fair and relevant question.
Issue 2:
[11]
It is clear to me, from a reading of the officer's notes, that he was satisfied that the $17,000.00 advanced by the applicant's brother was a sufficient amount for settlement purposes. The officer, however, remained concerned about the applicant's utter lack of assets after 23 years of employment. In my view, this was a relevant consideration because it is fair to assume, absent a satisfactory explanation, that someone in the applicant's circumstances, who has no assets, may well have a problem with motivation. In this case, an opportunity to explain the lack of assets was given but a satisfactory explanation was not forthcoming.
[12]
The applicant protests that the officer overlooked the $4,000.00 in jewelry. If that error was made, it was inconsequential. Firstly, both parties, husband and wife, claimed the jewelry as assets and no one mentioned an intention to sell the jewelry. It was essentially a nonliquid, long-term family asset. It was probably for this reason that, when asked during the interview whether he had any assets, the applicant, in a forthright manner, replied that he had none. In these circumstances, I can find no error in the officer's apparent failure to consider the jewelry.
Issue 3:
[13]
The officer issued the decision on February 1, 1996, which was one week before he received confirmation both that $17,000.00 had been placed in a bank account for the applicant's use and that the applicant had a brother who was a Canadian citizen.
[14]
There is no question that, if a visa officer asks for follow-up material and then decides an application against an applicant based on matters which were to be dealt with in the promised material, the rules of natural justice will be offended. In this case, however, no such problem arose.
[15]
The officer made it very clear during the interview that the $17,000.00, which he regarded as settlement funds, had nothing to do with the issue of savings which he viewed as a matter relevant to personal suitability. 	When the officer made the decision, it was clearly based on an acceptance that the applicant had a Canadian brother who would assist him, because the assisted relative bonus was applied. Further, the officer took no issue in the decision with the sufficiency of the applicant's settlement funds. The officer raised that issue in the interview and was clearly satisfied with the $17,000.00 supplied by the applicant's brother. Further, he accepted in his decision that that money existed and would be available to the applicant.
[16]
For these reasons, the confirming documents had no bearing on the decision. The validity of their contents was assumed by the officer when he made the decision. In these circumstances, I can find no failure of natural justice.
Conclusion:
[17]
The application will be dismissed.
Certification:
[18]
Applicant's counsel has posed the following question for certification: Does personal suitability, as described in Schedule 1, of Factor 9, of
Immigration Regulations, 1978
, SOR-78-172, encompass an assessment of an applicant's savings in the country of origin?
[19]
In my view, this is not a serious question.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), affd. [1995], 1 S.C.R. 725; 179 N.R. 70, Strayer, J., held that the focus of an assessment of personal suitability is upon economic factors. That being so, it seems clear that an officer's forecast about an applicant's potential for successful establishment in Canada would be and should be informed by an understanding of an applicant's economic history. Accordingly, the question will not be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]