[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision made March 25, 1993, by the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board, that the applicant is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant is a 31 year old female, a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka who lived most of her life in the northern part of the state in Jaffna, where she was employed by the government of Sri Lanka in a teaching position. In the spring of 1991 her parents arranged for her to be married to a Tamil man who was then in Canada as a refugee claimant in the backlog whose claim had not then been determined. In August and again in October 1991, she travelled to Colombo, for a week on each occasion, in order to communicate with her husband-to-be. On her return home to Jaffna following the second visit to Colombo she was threatened by the Tigers who indicated a belief she was communicating information about them to the government or the Army. In anticipation that her fiance's refugee status in Canada would be confirmed and that he could then sponsor her immigration to Canada to be his wife, she again travelled to Colombo in January 1992. She remained there until mid-March when, her fiance's hopes to sponsor her immigration not having by then been realized, her father made arrangements with an agent for her to leave Sri Lanka and to come to Canada.
[3]
She left Sri Lanka with a valid Sri Lankan passport, which had been renewed in March 1992. That passport was given to the agent who provided false travel documents on which she arrived in Canada in April 1992 and made a claim to be a Convention refugee.
[4]
In its decision the Convention Refugee Determination Division reviewed the evidence from her Personal Information Form, and from her oral testimony, and it had before it considerable documentary evidence submitted by her counsel and by the Refugee Hearing Officer (RHO). It noted that the applicant's claim so far as it was related to persecution on grounds of nationality was agreed not to be an issue, and insofar as it related to persecution on grounds of region there was no evidence to support that basis as well-founded. These findings are not contested.
[5]
In relation to her claim to fear persecution by reason of race, political opinion and membership in a particular social group, the tribunal found that "The claimant was evasive and inconsistent in important aspects of her testimony ... The panel therefore has serious reservations about the credibility of the claimant ...", and it set out certain matters on which the evidence was seen to be inconsistent or her testimony evasive.
[6]
One of the grounds for which judicial review is sought concerns the tribunal's findings concerning the applicant's credibility. Considerable argument was addressed to this and it was argued that the tribunal erred in law or made unreasonable findings of fact not based on the evidence before it in its challenge to the applicant's overall credibility. However, as I read its decision, the tribunal did not base its decision on its stated reservations concerning the applicant's credibility. It specifically states, after review of the matter of her credibility,
"Leaving aside the inconsistencies and adjustments in the claimant's testimony, the panel has considered whether her fear of returning to Sri Lanka is well-founded. We have concluded that it is not ..."
[7]
Its decision then turns to the circumstances of the applicant and the objective basis for her claim to fear persecution if she were returned to Sri Lanka, particularly in light of the applicant's evidence about her experience in Colombo. While not expressly stated to be discussion in relation to an internal flight alternative (IFA) it is clear from the record that this was an issue, of which notice was given at the commencement of the hearing, of concern and interest to the tribunal, and evidence concerning her experience in Colombo was specifically sought by questions of her counsel and of the RHO.
[8]
This portion of the tribunal's decision raises a second ground claimed for judicial review. It is argued that, whatever the tribunal may have meant, it misstated the test or standard by which the applicant's claim to fear persecution if she were to be returned to Colombo within Sri Lanka is to be assessed. That claim relates to the following portion of the tribunal's decision:
"The claimant stayed with friends in Colombo on at least three occasions, and once for a number of weeks. When asked why she could not do so in future, she said only that it would be too dangerous for her to live in Colombo. The panel, on the basis of the claimant's experience in Colombo, does not believe this to be the case. We recognize that Tamils of the claimant's age have been detained during police sweeps, and that some have been mistreated; this does not mean, however, that there is a good possibility that
all
Tamil females of the claimant's age in Colombo will be persecuted.
"The panel concludes, therefore, on the basis of all the evidence, that although the claimant's fear of persecution in the Jaffna area may be well-founded, there is no more than a mere possibility that she would be persecuted if she lived in Colombo."
[9]
The tribunal had earlier considered the evidence of the applicant's experience with the police in Colombo, the source from which she claimed to fear persecution in the Colombo area, and had concluded that it did not demonstrate persecution. The reference in its decision to recognition "that Tamils of the claimant's age have been detained during police sweeps, and that some have been mistreated" is obviously made in regard to documentary evidence. However, its continuing interpretation of that evidence, "that it does not mean ... that there is a good possibility that
all
Tamil females of the claimant's age in Colombo will be persecuted" followed by the tribunal's stated conclusion "therefore, on the basis of all the evidence ... there is no more than a mere possibility that she would be persecuted if she lived in Colombo", in my view implies a standard of proof higher than required. It suggests that the applicant must persuade the tribunal that in regard to the future, since that is the time of significance, "there is a good possibility that
all
Tamil females of the claimant's age in Colombo will be persecuted", in the words of the tribunal. If that were established to the satisfaction of the tribunal, then every female Tamil of the claimant's age for whom Colombo is a suggested residence could be expected to be recognized as a Convention refugee.
[10]
The burden on the applicant is significant, to establish that she fears persecution on a ground set out in the definition of Convention refugee, and that her fear is well-founded. The latter requirement, based on an objective assessment of the evidence in regard her fear as expressed need only demonstrate a reasonable probability of persecution of herself, not a probability based on establishment of a good possibility that all Tamil females of her age will be persecuted.
[11]
While the tribunal's statement in regard to the evidentiary standard to be applied in this case may be an error in form, and not intended by the tribunal, it is nonetheless an error in law, which warrants allowing the application, setting aside the tribunal's decision and referring the applicant's claim back to the Immigration and Refugee Board for reconsideration by a differently constituted panel. Thus, an order so providing issues.
Application allowed.
Editor: Donna E. Mitchell/nmg
[End of document]