 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Iscar Limited and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  November 4, 1988. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The plaintiffs brought a copyright infringement action against the defendants. The defendants applied under rule 419(a) to strike the statement of claim as disclosing no cause of action. The defendants raised the issue of the prothonotary's jurisdiction to hear and dispose of the application. 
 
 
 
 The Associate Senior Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada ruled that he had jurisdiction pursuant to rule 336(1)(g) and Practice Note No. 3. The prothonotary dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 For a related case see 18 F.T.R. 264. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 2523 
 
 Registrars and prothonotaries - Jurisdiction - Interlocutory application - Defendants applied under rule 419(a) to strike the plaintiffs' statement of claim - Rule 336(2)(a) and Practice Note No. 3 empowered a prothonotary to hear and dispose of any interlocutory application other than, inter alia, an application which by law may be heard and determined only by a judge of the court - The Associate Senior Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada stated that an application to strike a statement of claim in its entirety was an interlocutory application and may, under the authority of the Rules, be assigned for hearing and disposition to a prothonotary - The prothonotary stated that the application was not one which could be heard and determined only by a judge of the court - See paragraphs 1 to 11. 
 
 
 
 Practice - Topic 2201 
 
 Pleadings - Striking out pleadings - Jurisdiction - [See  
 Courts - Topic 2523  
 above.] 
 
 
 
 Statutes - Topic 2261 
 
 Interpretation - Presumptions - Against abridgment of proprietary rights - The Associate Senior Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada stated that where the effect of legislation was to remove property rights there was a presumption that the legislation did not apply to actions in progress - See paragraph 19. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
 In re Joseph Suche & Co. Ltd., 1 Ch. D. 48, refd to. [para. 19]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 23]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Constitution Act, 1867, sect. 96 [para. 11]. 
 
 Copyright Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-30, sect. 46.1 [para. 16]. 
 
 Copyright Act, S.C. 1988, c. 15, sect. 11 [para. 16]; sect. 24 [para. 17]. 
 
 Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, sect. 12(1) [para. 11]; sect. 12(3) [para. 2]. 
 
 Federal Court Rules, rule 336(1)(g) [para. 3]; rule 419(a) [para. 1]. 
 
 Federal Court of Canada, Practice Note No. 3 [para. 4]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 G. Gaikis, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Roger T. Hughes, Q.C., for the defendants. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Smart and Biggar, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Sim, Hughes, Dimock, Toronto, Ontario, for the defendants. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on November 4, 1988, at Toronto, Ontario, before Giles, A.S.P., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment orally on November 4, 1988. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Giles, A.S.P. [orally] 
 : Thank you. The motion before me is under rule 419(1)(a) to strike a Statement of Claim as disclosing no cause of action. As a preliminary matter, counsel for the defendant/applicant raised the question of the jurisdiction of a Prothonotary to hear such a motion. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  Subsection (3) of s. 12 of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp), c. 10, provides that "The powers, duties and functions of the prothonotaries shall be as determined by the Rules." 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Rule 336(1)(g) provides in part that a prothonotary shall have the power ... "to dispose of any interlocutory application assigned to him specifically or to any prothonotary, by special or general direction of the Chief Justice or Associate Chief Justice, ..." 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Practice Note No. 3 reads: 
 
 
 
 "General Direction under Rule 336(1) (g). Under Rule 336(1)(g) the Senior Prothonotary and the Associate Senior Prothonotary are empowered to hear and dispose of any interlocutory application in the Trial Division other than the following, that is to say: 
 
 
 
 1. any application which by law may be heard and determined only by a judge of the court; 
 
 
 
 2. any application for an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver whether made ex parte or on notice, including applications for Mareva or Anton Pillar relief; 
 
 
 
 3. any application under section 18 of the Federal Court Act for relief of any kind therein mentioned; 
 
 
 
 4. any application for an order for disclosure of information or documents which in their nature are confidential or in respect to which a direction to withhold them from public inspection has been given by a judge; 
 
 
 
 5. any application to vary or discharge an order of a judge of the court. James A. Jerome, Associate Chief Justice, Ottawa, October 31, 1985." 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  As can be seen pursuant to the authority of rule 336(1)(g), the Associate Chief Justice has by a general direction empowered the Senior Prothonotary and the Associate Senior Prothonotary to hear and dispose of interlocutory applications save and except for certain types of interlocutory location set out in the direction. Among the types of interlocutory application excepted is: 
 
 
 
 "1. any application which by law may be determined only by a judge of the court." 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Therefore to find that I have jurisdiction, I must find that an application for an Order to strike a Statement of Claim in its entirety under rule 419 is an interlocutory application and further, that such application is not required by law to be heard only by a judge of the court. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Is a motion to strike a Statement of Claim in its entirety, interlocutory by nature? A distinction must be noted between an interlocutory order or judgment, on the one hand and an interlocutory application on the other. By rule 336(1)(g), what the Chief Justice or Associate Chief Justice may assign to a prothonotary to hear and dispose of, is an interlocutory application. An interlocutory application is one that arises in the course of an action. That is to say, in the usual case, between the institution of the action and judgment after trial. A final order or judgment is one that finally determines an issue between the parties (the existence of a right of appeal does not affect the finality of the order or judgment). 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  It can be seen that it is possible for an interlocutory application to result in a final judgment or order. It would appear then that the Chief Justice or the Associate Chief Justice could assign to a prothonotary to hear and dispose of an application to strike a Statement of Claim in its entirety and dismiss the action, which application is interlocutory even though the resulting order finally determines the issue between the parties. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  In addition, I note that in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  frivolous and vexatious was an interlocutory order, at least for the purposes of time for appeal. In that case, at page 494, Lord Justice Buckley is reported as saying: 
 
 
 
 "This, however, is an order in favour of the defendants and it brings this action altogether to an end. To my mind it would be reasonable to say that it is a final order. But I do not think I am entitled to found myself on that, because there have been so many decisions in which orders apparently final have been treated as interlocutory." 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Having found that an application to strike a Statement of Claim in its entirety is an interlocutory application and thus may, under the authority of the Rules, be assigned for hearing and disposition to a prothonotary, it remains to determine whether the application is one which can be heard and determined only by a judge of the court. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Counsel pointed out to me that the Masters of the Supreme Court of Ontario did not hear motions to strike Statements of Claim in their entirety. I note that the restraint imposed by s. 96 of the Constitution Act 1867 on the powers of the Provinces to appoint officials with certain judicial powers is not applicable to the Government of Canada. By s. 12(1) of the Federal Court Act, the Governor-in-Council is empowered to appoint prothonotaries. By s. 12(3) of that Act, it is provided that the powers, duties and functions of prothonotaries shall be determined by the Rules. As noted previously, rule 336 provides for certain powers of prothonotaries. I am therefore of the opinion that the Chief Justice or the Associate Chief Justice may give the power to hear and dispose of an application to strike a Statement of Claim under rule 419 to a prothonotary and the Associate Chief Justice has done so. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  I also note that several orders in which applications to strike Statements of Claim have been considered by prothonotaries, have been appealed to judges of the Trial Division of this court.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decided those appeals, it does not appear that the question of jurisdiction was argued.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Rouleau. It is apparent from his Reasons that counsel had refused to appear before a prothonotary and had insisted on appearing before a judge. His remarks indicating a prothonotary has jurisdiction in an application for a motion to strike are therefore unfortunately  
 dicta 
 , but being the only case where the jurisdiction of prothonotaries appears to have been considered, I must cite that case. However, I point out that the preliminary objection, in fact a polite question, was raised in this case, in my opinion, very properly and certainly with no suggestion of temerity or audacity and with every indication of the willingness or even anxiousness that I should proceed to hear the motion should I find that I had jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  I was taken somewhat by surprise by the objection, not having considered the matter or jurisdiction since the first such motion was assigned to me several years ago. I expressed the view from the Bench that a successful motion to strike should be followed after the expiry of the appeal period by a motion to dismiss for want of prosecution, analogizing to the situation which existed when actions were commenced by issuing a writ followed by a Statement of Claim. From the foregoing reasoning, it is apparent that the two stage procedure I suggested from the bench is not necessary. This is so even in a case where a Statement of Claim is struck in its entirety without any provision that the claim is struck without prejudice to the plaintiff's right to file a fresh Statement of Claim. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  At an earlier stage in this action, the defendant moved for a stay on the grounds that Bill C60 was before the House of Commons and would, if passed, remove any right the plaintiff might have in this action. Neither side argued the matter of retroactivity or retrospectivity, nevertheless in my view, which I expressed in written reasons, the legislation if passed, as then worded would not apply to this action. I refused a stay on that ground. My decision was appealed to the Associate Chief Justice who did not disapprove my reasoning but expressed a different reason for refusing a stay. The different reason was the uncertainty of any bill preceding to proclamation [see 18 F.T.R. 264]. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Counsel for the respondent/plaintiff argued issue estoppel on the grounds I had found that the plaintiffs' alleged rights would not be fatally affected by the passage of the legislation. Counsel for the defendant, correctly in my view, argued that the issue which might have been estopped was the issue of the stay, which was the subject of the motion before me on the former occasion. My reasons, in counsel's view, did not by the doctrine of issue estoppel, apply to the motion now in issue. I have no doubt that counsels' contention was correct. Nevertheless, I had reviewed the possibility of relation back of this legislation. I therefore suggested to counsel for the defendant/applicant that he might wish the motion to be heard by someone else. Counsel was so complimentary and persuasive in representing that I should continue to hear the motion that I, perhaps wrongly, proceeded to do so. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Section 46.1 of the Copyright Act, as enacted by S.C. 1988, c. 15, s. 11 reads: 
 
 
 
 "46.1(1) The following acts do not constitute an infringement of the copyright or moral rights in a work: 
 
 
 
 (a) applying to a useful article features that are dictated solely by a utilitarian function of the article; 
 
 
 
 (b) by reference solely to a useful article, making a drawing or other reproduction in any material form of any features of the article that are dictated solely by a utilitarian function of the article; 
 
 
 
 (c) doing with a useful article having only features described in paragraph (a) or doing with a drawing or reproduction that is made as described in paragraph (b) anything that the owner of the copyright has the sole right to do with the work; or 
 
 
 
 (d) using any method or principle of manufacture or construction. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Nothing in subsection (1) affects the copyright or the moral rights in a record, perforated roll, cinematograph film or other contrivance by means of which a work may be mechanically reproduced, performed or delivered." 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Section 24 of the amending statute reads: 
 
 
 
 "24 Subsection 46(1) and section 46.1 of the Copyright Act, as enabled by section 11, apply in respect of any alleged infringement of copyright occurring prior to, on or after the day on which section 11 comes into force." 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The acts alleged as infringements in the Statement of Claim, it was submitted by the defendant's counsel, are among those to which s. 46.1 applies. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Reading s. 46.1 of the Copyright Act and s. 24 of the amending statute together, it is apparent that any action specified whenever done does not constitute an infringement. I understand that to mean that the act whenever done does not at the moment of proclamation of the section or thereafter constitute an infringement. One cannot construe the wording to mean that such an act whenever done did not at the time it was done constitute an infringement. There are cases decided before the enactment of s. 46.1 in which apparently similar acts have been held to be infringements. It is therefore possible that a trial judge when evidence is presented, would find that at the time the acts complained of were done, they constituted infringements. It therefore is necessary to determine the effect of this legislation on this action so far as it seeks relief for acts done before proclamation. Where as in this case the effect of the legislation is to remove property rights, there is a presumption that the legislation does not apply to actions in progress. This principle was expressed by Sir George Jessel, the Master of the Rolls, in the case of In re Joseph Suche & Co. Limited, 1 Ch. D. 48, where he said at page 50: 
 
 
 
 ".... it is a general rule that when the Legislature alters the rights of parties by taking away or conferring any right of action, its enactments, unless in express terms they apply to pending actions, do not affect them. It is said that there is one exception to that rule, namely, that, when enactments merely affect procedure and do not extend to rights of action, they have been held to apply to existing rights ..." 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  However, the reasons for judgment of Sir George Jessel still the Master of the Rolls in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  legislation should apply to actions in progress when the legislation came into force.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  statute repealed an earlier statute, 22 & 23 Vict., c. 35, in which relief from forfeiture was provided and enacted new legislation containing different provisions for relief from forfeiture. The Master of the Rolls pointed out, that were the new provisions for relief from forfeiture not to apply to prior breaches, the legislation, intended to allow greater scope for the power to relieve from forfeiture, would result in a tenant being denied a right to relief which he had previously had, as well as the somewhat different right to relief which the new legislation was intended to provide. The Master of the Rolls therefore concluded that to further the intention of the new legislation, it must be held to apply to pending proceedings.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  legislation were not applied to pending litigation, it would have the opposite effect to that intended. Interpreting the Copyright Act amendments not to apply to pending litigation does not result in the removal of pre-existing rights which it was intended the plaintiff should continue to have. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  I have reviewed the cases and texts cited by counsel at the hearing and those cited in my Reasons of November 3rd, 1987, and find none which would impair the applicability of the rule expressed in In re Suche. There is no need for me to comment on the submissions of plaintiff's counsel with respect to the Canadian Bill of Rights 8 and 9 Elizabeth 2, c. 44 and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Constitution Act, 1982. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  It remains to be considered whether a cause of action existed before the 1988 legislation came into force. The fact situation here may not be dissimilar to that in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R. (3d) 289 (F.C.A.), in that the protection of the Copyright Act is claimed for something which may overlap the protection available under the Industrial Design Act. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  The fact situation may also be one in which the protection available under the Copyright Act overlaps the protection available under the Patent Act. It may be that the fact situation is such that no part of the work for which copyright protection is claimed is not either within the protection available under the Industrial Design Act or the Patent Act and that therefore, pursuant to the reasoning  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Boats and the English case,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Copyright Act provides no protection. It may be that there is a gap in which the Copyright Act can be applicable. It was argued that there could in theory be no such gap and that therefore factual evidence was not necessary for me to determine that there was no cause of action. That is to say, that to a drawing of an object that is useful there are only two aspects, the design aspect and the functional aspect. These aspects would at some time in history have been registerable as industrial designs or been patentable had legislation for that purpose been in existence. This, of course, is to deny to a painting of a sail boat any protection in copyright. I am not prepared to find that there can be no such gap in theory. There was no evidence before me on which I could find there is not in fact a gap. I note that in all the cases cited dealing with overlapping, the decision depended on the facts. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  For the foregoing reasons, I intend to dismiss this motion with costs to the plaintiff in the case. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



