 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 746278  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 746278 Ontario Limited, carrying on business as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T-2495-87) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: 746278  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Prothonotary 
 
 February 17, 1989. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Sigma International Security Inc. went bankrupt. 746278 Ontario Ltd. (the plaintiff) purchased the bankrupt's assets from the trustee in bankruptcy, including registered trademarks. In the meantime the defendant Courtot, a former officer of Sigma, notified Sigma's customers that he had the right to carry on Sigma's business. As a result of this notice, the plaintiff commenced an action against Courtot, alleging that Courtot was illegally soliciting and advertising security systems similar to those offered by the plaintiff in association with the Sigma trademark and design. The plaintiff then applied for an interim injunction. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, in a decision reported 16 F.T.R. 136, granted the interim injunction. Subsequently, the plaintiff applied for an interlocutory injunction pending trial. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, in a decision reported 16 F.T.R. 141, allowed the plaintiff's application and granted the interlocutory injunction. Courtot appealed respecting certain aspects of the Trial Division's order. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Appeal, in a decision reported 87 N.R. 8, allowed the appeal in part by varying the provisions of the injunction. Courtot thereafter filed a statement of defence. He then filed a notice of motion seeking a reference as to damages (prior to trial), respecting damages allegedly incurred in the period covered by the interim and interlocutory injunctions, until varied by the Federal Court of Appeal. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, in a decision reported 25 F.T.R. 272, refused to order a reference where cross-examination of Courtot on affidavits was underway. The court therefore adjourned the motion sine die pending completion of the cross-examination. 
 
 
 
 The motion subsequently came before the Associate Senior Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division. The Associate Senior Prothonotary, in the decision reported below, dismissed the motion where a reference at this time might result in unnecessary duplication of evidence. He opined that the decision on a reference should be postponed until trial of the action. 
 
 
 
 Courtot appealed the decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary - see 25 F.T.R. 281. 
 
 
 
 Practice - Topic 3761 
 
 References and inquiries - When available - General - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, issued an interim and subsequently an interlocutory injunction in a trademarks dispute - The injunctions were subsequently varied by the Federal Court of Appeal - Before trial of the matter, the defendant moved for a reference to determine damages incurred during the term of the injunctions, until varied by the Court of Appeal - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, refused to order the reference while cross-examination of the defendant on certain affidavits was in progress - After cross-examination was completed, an Associate Senior Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, also refused to grant the reference prior to trial because the reference might result in an unnecessary duplication of evidence. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  consd. [para. 4]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Federal Court Rules, rule 336(1)(d), rule 336(1)(f) [para. 2]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 R.G. Chapman, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 R. Dimock, for the defendants. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Lilly, Goldman, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Sim, Hughes, Dimock, Toronto, Ontario, for the defendants. 
 
 
 
 This motion was heard in Toronto, Ontario, on January 30, 1989, before Giles, Associate Senior Prothonotary, of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on February 17, 1989: 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Giles, Associate Senior Prothonotary 
 : In this action involving an alleged infringement of trademark, the plaintiff obtained an interlocutory injunction. [See 16 F.T.R. 141]. The interlocutory injunction was found by the Federal Court of Appeal to restrain actions involving the use of trademark and actions not involving the use of trademark. Insofar as the injunction restrained actions not involving the use of trademark, it was dissolved. [See 87 N.R. 8]. To obtain the injunction in the first instance, the plaintiff had given the usual undertaking to be responsible for damages. The action has not yet been set down for trial. The defendant has moved for a reference to determine the damages resulting from the part of the injunction which was dissolved. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  Counsel for the plaintiff argued that it was first necessary to determine if damages were payable before a reference could be directed. As a preliminary objection, counsel questioned my jurisdiction to make such a determination, arguing that the determination that damages were payable was a final determination of that issue and was in the nature of a final order or judgment. The first ground on which counsel challenged my jurisdiction was that rule 336(1)(d) in providing jurisdiction to give final judgments in default of pleading, necessarily implied a prothonotary had no jurisdiction to give any other type of final judgment or order. In my view, this argument has no merit because, inter alia, rule 336(1)(f) provides jurisdiction for prothonotaries to hear and dispose of actions therein described. That subrule necessarily provides a jurisdiction to give final judgment other than in default of pleadings. Rule 336(1)(d) is therefore not exhaustive of a prothonotary's jurisdiction to give final orders and judgments. Another ground argued by counsel for lack of jurisdiction was that an application for determination that damages were payable was not an interlocutory application within the meaning of rule 336(1)(f) because it resulted in a final judgment or order on that point. In my view, counsel in his argument has failed to note that the jurisdiction given to a prothonotary is the jurisdiction to hear interlocutory applications, that is to say applications in the course of an action. The fact that such an action may finally determine an issue other than the main issue, does not detract from the interlocutory nature of the application. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Thirdly, counsel cited  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as authority for the proposition that a master did not have jurisdiction to order a reference in a case such as this. I read that case as authority for the proposition not that a master as such does not have jurisdiction but that the matter in that case should be disposed of by the trial judge and not prior to trial. The application before me, being interlocutory, I found that I had jurisdiction to hear it, notwithstanding its possible final aspects. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The law with regard to damages resulting from interlocutory injunctions has developed since 1882 when the Master of the Rolls (Sir George Jessel) in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  obtaining an interlocutory injunction could be criticized. Spence, J., delivering judgment for the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  indicated that the current test was that laid down in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  undertaking as to damages, if it afterwards is established at trial that the plaintiff is not entitled to an injunction, an inquiry as to damages may be directed though the plaintiff is not guilty of misrepresentation, suppression, or other default in obtaining the injunction.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  judge who dissolves interim injunction decide whether a reference as to damages should be ordered. There are, however, numerous cases including some in which it has been decided to defer the determination to the trial judge, where it has been pointed out that in the proper case, an application may be made when the interlocutory injunction is dissolved or between that time and a time after trial.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the application for an inquiry must be made either when the injunction is dissolved or at the trial. One of these must be the most proper time. The application may be made when the injunction is dissolved, but if made then it probably will be ordered to stand over till trial." 
 
 
 
 In that case, Brett, L.J., said at p. 427: 
 
 
 
 "As regards the time when the application ought to be made, I do not think that we ought to lay down that it must be made at the time when the injunction is dissolved. I do not think that the applicant necessarily is to be allowed to postpone it till the trial, nor do I say that he never can successfully make application after the trial. I think that he ought to make it within a reasonable time after the dissolution of the injunction, and that what is a reasonable time depends on the circumstances of the case." 
 
 
 
 Cotton, L.J., said at p. 430: 
 
 
 
 "As regards the time of the application, there is no doubt that the failure to apply earlier does not deprive the court of its jurisdiction founded on the undertaking. It is certainly desirable that the application should be made either at the time when the injunction is dissolved or at the hearing of the cause. No rule, however, has been laid down that it must be made at one or the other of those times, and I do not say that the court ought to lay down any express limit as to time, still I think that a long delay might of itself be fatal to the application." 
 
 
 
 [5] 
   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  consent, deferred the award of a reference. He indicated it was not appropriate to order an inquiry at that time because it had not yet been established that the injunction ought not to have been granted in the first instance. I note that in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  injunction, nevertheless directed a reference be held before trial on terms. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In November of 1988, MacKay, J., refused an application for a reference in this case at a time when cross-examination on affidavits had not been completed. In doing so he mentioned the fact that the purpose of a reference to determine matters other than at trial is to expedite the action and minimize its expense. In this case, the defendant is in the business of selling and servicing devices to detect the theft of merchandise. The defendant was enjoined from conducting a portion of that business. After some months, the injunction was dissolved with respect to a part of that portion. That is, the part not carried on in association with the trademark. If a reference were to be held at this stage, it would be necessary to produce evidence to distinguish between the damages associated with the restraint on that part of the business not associated with the trademark from the damages associated with the restraint on that part of the business carried on in association with the trademark. If at trial, the plaintiff's case were dismissed, a further reference would have to be held and a portion of the evidence on the earlier reference (that required to make the above distinction) would have been unnecessary. Because a reference at this time might result in unnecessary duplication, I am of the view that the decision to award a reference to determine the damages resulting from that part of the injunction dissolved by the Federal Court of Appeal should be postponed until trial of the action. 
 
 
 
 ORDER: 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Motion dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Motion dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



