[1]
Beaudry, J.
: Quality Goods I.M.D. Inc. (Quality Goods), also called Produits de Qualité I.M.D. Inc., is a company that manufactures and sells souvenir products. In 1996, it created the "Explore Canada" logo and has been since then displaying it on its T-shirts, hats, mugs, key chains and on a variety of other items that are usually found in tourist stores. In August 1999, Tommy Hilfiger Licensing Inc. (THLI) and Tommy Hilfiger Canada Inc. (THC) indicated to two of the most important customers of Quality Goods that they would be the subject of legal proceedings unless they stopped selling the "Explore Canada" products. Both of these customers stopped ordering these products and one even returned such products. THLI and THC are now alleging that Quality Goods and Harold Rosen, as the company's President, Director and Officer, have infringed four Hilfiger trademarks consisting of rectangles with red, white and blue colours in it and with the words "Tommy Hilfiger" in two of those trademarks, and have also infringed the trademark "Tommy Hilfiger". THLI and THC are also alleging passing-off and depreciation of the value of the goodwill attached to their trademarks. They are seeking an injunction, an accounting of profits, damages, exemplary damages, pre-judgment and post-judgment interest, an order for delivery of any offending wares in the defendants' possession, and their costs. If the plaintiffs are successful, there is a consent that those matters will be dealt with after further submissions by counsel or settled between the parties.
[2]
The defendants deny any infringement. Moreover, they argue that the registered trademarks are invalid. The defendants seek the dismissal of the action with costs, as well as the expungement of the registered trademarks. By counterclaim, the defendant Rosen also seeks damages in the amount of $1,000,000 for reductions in sales and profit margins in the fiscal years 2000 and 2001 and in the value of his shares in Quality Goods, pre-judgment and post-judgment interest. If the defendants are successful, there is a consent that the question of cost, pre-judgment and post-judgment interest will be dealt with after further submissions by counsel or settled between the parties.
ISSUES
[3]
The issues are as follows:
1. Are the registered Hilfiger trademarks invalid?
2. Did the defendants infringe the plaintiffs' rights under s. 19 of the
Trademarks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (
Act
)?
3. Did the defendants infringe the plaintiffs' rights under s. 20 of the
Act
?
4. Was the defendants' use of his marks likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attaching to plaintiffs' trademarks contrary to s. 22 of the
Act
?
5. Was there passing-off of the defendants' wares as those of the plaintiffs in contravention of paragraph 7(b) of the
Act
?
6. Should the defendant Rosen be personally held liable/responsible for the wrongdoing, if any, of the defendant Quality Goods?
7. Is the defendant Rosen entitled to damages in the amount of one million dollars for the reduction in sales and profit margins and in the value of his shares?
BACKGROUND
[4]
I will rely substantially on the Agreed Statement of Facts submitted by the parties to describe the general background and more specific issues.
The plaintiffs, their wares and sales
[5]
The plaintiff THLI is a company incorporated and based in the State of Delaware. It owns the trademarks relating to the Tommy Hilfiger brand in Canada and elsewhere and licenses these trademarks to others in return for royalty payments.
[6]
The plaintiff THC is a company incorporated and based in Canada. THC manufactures, sells, distributes and advertises articles of clothing and accessories in association with trademarks under licence from THLI.
[7]
THLI owns the following trademarks, that it registered in Canada:
1. trademark TMA 375,827 (TMA '827) registered November 16, 1990 in association with clothing for men, namely pants, jackets, shorts, suits, sweaters, sweatpants, sweatshorts, bathing suits, robes, coats, jackets, raincoats, undershirts;
2. trademark TMA 432,095 (TMA '095) registered August 26, 1994 in association with clothing for men and women, namely shirts, pants, jackets, sweaters, shorts, belts, vests, sport jackets, coats, raincoats, parkas; luggage; overnight bags; make-up kits and shaving kits;
3. trademark TMA 482,283 (TMA '283) registered September 9, 1997 in association with cosmetics; perfumery; toiletries; suntan lotions; bronzing sticks; soap products and hair care products;
4. trademark TMA 482,082 (TMA '082) registered September 5, 1997 in association with cosmetics; perfumery; toiletries; suntan lotions; bronzing sticks; soap products and hair care products.
5. trademark TMA 446,291 (TMA '291) registered August 18, 1995 in association with blazers, coats, jackets, jeans, overcoats, pants, parkas, shirts, shorts, sportcoats, sportjackets, sweaters, turtlenecks, vests, bathing suits, caps, socks, suits, sweatpants, sweatshirts, ties, undershirts, underwear.
[8]
For ease of reference, the first four trademarks will be referred to as the "Hilfiger flag trademarks". These Hilfiger flag trademarks look like this:
[Diagram omitted - See printed version to view]
Trademark: TOMMY HILFIGER & DESIGN
Registration No.: TMA375827
[Diagram omitted - See printed version to view]
Trademark: TAG (RECTANGLES) DESIGN
Registration No.: TMA432,095
[Diagram omitted - See printed version to view]
Trademark: RECTANGLES DESIGN
Registration No.: TMA482283
[Diagram omitted - See printed version to view]
Trademark: TOMMY HILFIGER & DESIGN
Registration No.: TMA482,082
and
Registration No.: TMA446,291
for the trademark TOMMY HILFIGER
[9]
Since the early nineties, THC commenced selling wares bearing TMA '827 and in 1993, 1994 and 1995, wares bearing TMA '095 and TMA '291 (Mr. Green and Abramowitz testimonies); the other two trademarks bearing TMA '082 and '283, in 1997.
[10]
In 1996 and throughout the years, THC has sold or distributed promotional items marked with the Hilfiger trademarks such as pins, candles, calculators, carrying bags, coffee thermoses, key chains, bags, mouse pads, coffee mugs, pens, t-shirts, soccer balls, basketballs, water bottle and umbrellas.
[11]
THC's sales of Tommy Hilfiger clothing in Canada are as follows: $8 million (1992), $8 million (1993), $10 million (1994), $16 million (1995), $25 million (1996), $50 million (1997), $90 million (1998), $125 million (1999), $125 million (2000), $125 million (2001). THC sells in chain stores, specialty stores and large department stores such as The Bay and Eaton's. THC is selective with respect to its retail customers. It considers the image of the retailer, the location of the stores and the retailer's brand selection in determining whether the retailer will be permitted to sell Hilfiger products. The plaintiffs target the middle to the higher end market.
[12]
The Tommy Hilfiger brand and THLI licensed products have been advertised in Canada using different means: advertisements placed in foreign magazines and other publications circulated in Canada including Vanity Fair, GQ, Men's Journal, Details, Rolling Stone, Men's Health, The New York Times and the New York Times Magazine; advertisements placed in Canadian magazines including Macleans, Toronto Life Fashion, Toronto Life and Elle Québec; co-operative advertisements placed in Canadian magazines with Canadian retailers including The Bay and Eaton's department stores; billboards; in-store posters, signs and videos; sponsorship of tours or performances of musical groups including Pete Townsend, The Who and the Rolling Stones; sponsorships of events including the Toronto Film Festival and the Montreal Grand Prix; and contests.
The defendants, their wares and sales
[13]
The defendant Quality Goods is a company incorporated and based in Quebec. Quality Goods designs, manufactures, arranges for the manufacturing, sells, distributes and advertises souvenir products, including clothing, in association with the term "Explore Canada".
[14]
The defendant Harold Rosen is the President, a Director and Officer and the sole shareholder of the defendant Quality Goods.
[15]
In the summer of 1996, Quality Goods created the "Explore Canada" logo and subsequently created regional variations of the Explore Canada logo in which the name of a city or province was substituted for the word "Explore" in the Explore Canada logo. For ease of reference, the Explore Canada logo and its regional variations will be called "Explore Canada logo". The Explore Canada logo is depicted as follows:
[Diagram omitted - See printed version to view]
[16]
The Explore Canada logo was created by Harold Rosen and Allan Rosen, from the merchandising department, with the participation of Joel Noden, Quality Goods' Sales Manager, and Angelica Muntigal, Quality Goods' Artistic Director. Quality Goods has manufactured, or caused to be manufactured articles of clothing and accessories and novelty items marked with the Explore Canada logo it designed.
[17]
Quality Goods used the Explore Canada logo for a line of souvenir products (Explore Canada products): soft goods, namely t-shirts, golf shirts, sweatshirts, caps, toques, scarves, headbands, backpacks, waist bags, duffel bags and shopping bags, and hard goods, namely mugs, pens, key chains, licence plates, playing cards, magnets, hockey pucks, lapel pins, coasters, ashtrays, beer steins, shooters and shot glasses. Quality Goods first began to offer for sale and sell these Explore Canada products in Canada in 1996.
[18]
Total sales by Quality Goods of Explore Canada products were as follows:
Date
Hard Goods
Soft Goods
Total
As of May 30, 2001
$581,015.05
$1,431,306.60
$2,012,321.65
From May 30, 2001 to August 4, 2003
$11,849.02
$22,840.45
$34,689.47
From August 5, 2003 to May 13, 2004
$761.88
$635.45
$1,397.33
Although Quality Goods discontinued the sale of Explore Canada products as an active line of products as of October 15, 2001, it continued to sell the existing inventory and intends to continue to sell such inventory.
[19]
Quality Goods' customers for its Explore Canada products are tourist shops, duty free shops and specialty stores such as United Cigar Stores.
[20]
Quality Goods advertises its products in catalogues (distributed to retail customers), in trade magazines and at trade shows. Its advertising is not extensive and did not comprise any consumer advertising in the 1990s. Quality Goods promoted the sale of Explore Canada products at semi-annual gift trade shows in Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver and Edmonton by having product samples available and catalogues.
[21]
In August 1999, THLI and THC indicated to two of the most important customers of Quality Goods, HDS who operates United Cigar Stores, and the Niagara Park Commission, that they would be subjected to legal proceedings unless they stopped selling the Explore Canada products. Both of these customers stopped ordering these products after the summer of 1999 and HDS even returned such products.
[22]
Quality Goods received a cease and desist letter dated October 13, 1998 from THLI's solicitors demanding that it discontinue the sale of the Explore Canada products on grounds that the Explore Canada logo was in breach of THLI's trademarks. In a letter dated November 13, 1998, Quality Goods denied infringing THLI's rights and demanded that THLI not interfere with its customers' sales of such products.
[23]
The plaintiffs' Statement of Claim was filed on December 21, 1999.
ANALYSIS
Issue 1: Validity of the Hilfiger trademarks registrations
[24]
I cannot conclude that the Tommy Hilfiger trademarks are invalid for the following reasons.
Background
[25]
THI is a company incorporated on April 15, 1982, its principal office and place of business being in New York, New York. THI carried on the business of owning the trademarks and other intellectual property rights relating to the Tommy Hilfiger brand, of licensing such rights to others in return for royalty payments and designing articles of clothing to be sold under the Tommy Hilfiger brand.
[26]
THUSA is an American company incorporated in 1989 under the laws of the State of New York under the name Tommy Hilfiger Sportswear, Inc. The name was changed in 1992 to its current name.
[27]
THC is a Canadian company incorporated on December 19, 1989, under the laws of Canada. THC has its principal office and place of business in Montreal, Quebec.
[28]
On January 1st, 1990, THI granted a geographical licence to THC.
[29]
THLI is a company incorporated on July 23, 1992, under the laws of the State of Delaware, United States of America. THLI has its principal office and place of business in Wilmington, Delaware.
[30]
On August 3, 1992, THI assigned its rights to THLI. This agreement was reiterated on September 28, 1993. On June 19, 1994, THI merged into THUSA.
[31]
On May 24, 1995, THLI amended its licence with THC. The amendment enlarged the definition of trademark and permitted the use of each Hilfiger Flag Trademarks in Canada in association with articles of clothing and accessories under the strict control of THLI as to the character and quality of such use (Canadian Retail Licence).
[32]
In January 2001, THC was reorganized. The operation of THC's retail stores was transferred to a new corporation, THC Retail. A new corporation, THC Sales, assumed the position of a sales agent for THC in Canada outside of Québec. Both THC Retail and THC Sales are subsidiaries of THC and have its principal office and place of business in Toronto, Ontario.
[33]
TH Corp. is a holding company. It directly or indirectly owns or controls all of the above listed companies.
Onus of Proof
[34]
A registered trademark is presumed to be valid. Therefore, the onus of proof is on the person seeking expungement to establish the invalidity of the registration (Richard, Hugues G.,
Canadian Trademarks Act Annotated
, loose-leaf, binder 2, Thomson Carswell Edition, Toronto, page 18-3; also see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 151 (T.D.), at 170).
[35]
Section 19 of the
Trademarks Act
(
Act
) provides that:
"Rights conferred by registration
"19. Subject to sections 21, 32 and 67, the registration of a trademark in respect of any wares or services, unless shown to be invalid, gives to the owner of the trademark the exclusive right to the use throughout Canada of the trademark in respect of those wares or services."
"Droits conférés par l'enregistrement
"19. Sous réserve des articles 21, 32 et 67, l'enregistrement d'une marque de commerce à l'égard de marchandises ou services, sauf si son invalidité est démontrée, donne au propriétaire le droit exclusif à l'emploi de celle-ci, dans tout le Canada, en ce qui concerne ces marchandises ou services."
[36]
Pursuant to this section, the registration of a trademark gives the owner of the trademark the exclusive right to the use throughout Canada. However, it clearly appears that the invalidity of a trademark registration would be a complete defence in an action for infringement of ss. 19, 20 and 22 (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)).
[37]
Section 18 of the
Act
provides that a registration may be invalid on the basis of:
"1. unregistrability;
2. non-distinctiveness;
3. abandonment; or
4. subject to s. 17, non entitlement to secure registration."
[38]
Section 18 of the
Act
reads as follows:
"18(1) The registration of a trademark is invalid if
(a) the trademark was not registrable at the date of registration,
(b) the trademark is not distinctive at the time proceedings bringing the validity of the registration into question are commenced, or
(c) the trademark has been abandoned,
and subject to section 17, it is invalid if the applicant for registration was not the person entitled to secure the registration.
"Exception
"(2) No registration of a trademark that had been so used in Canada by the registrant or his predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the date of registration shall be held invalid merely on the ground that evidence of the distinctiveness was not submitted to the competent authority or tribunal before the grant of the registration."
"18(1) L'enregistrement d'une marque de commerce est invalide dans les cas suivants:
a) la marque de commerce n'était pas enregistrable à la date de l'enregistrement;
b) la marque de commerce n'est pas distinctive à l'époque où sont entamées les procédures contestant la validité de l'enregistrement;
c) la marque de commerce a été abandonnée.
Sous réserve de l'article 17, l'enregistrement est invalide si l'auteur de la demande n'était pas la personne ayant droit de l'obtenir.
"Exception
"(2) Nul enregistrement d'une marque de commerce qui était employée au Canada par l'inscrivant ou son prédécesseur en titre, au point d'être devenue distinctive à la date d'enregistrement, ne peut être considéré comme invalide pour la seule raison que la preuve de ce caractère distinctif n'a pas été soumise à l'autorité ou au tribunal compétent avant l'octroi de cet enregistrement."
[39]
Of the four potential grounds of invalidity, the arguments of the defendants are, for the vast majority, confined to paragraph 18(1)(b) of the
Act
, which deals with distinctiveness. However, Fox clearly indicates in
Canadian Law of Trademarks and Unfair Competition
(3rd Ed.), Toronto, Carswell Co. Ltd, 1972 at page 309, that the Court does have the power to consider potential grounds of invalidity even if not expressly raised by one of the parties.
[40]
In matters concerning rectification of the register, the Court acts in the interest of the purity of the register and in the public interest. In so acting, the Court has inherent jurisdiction and a duty to expunge in a proper case exproprio motu even though the point on which expungement is ordered has not been raised in the pleadings. But even though the Court might so act, although no person appeared as a person interested to ask for expungement, it ought to do so only in a case where it clearly appears that the mark is wrongly on the register. The public interest is of paramount importance, and the equities in favour of or against the applicant for rectification are of little relevance, for the matter is one between the public and the owner of the mark.
[41]
Having said that, I am of the view that this is not the case where the marks clearly appear to be wrongly on the register. Therefore, I will limit my analysis to the issue of distinctiveness and will only analyse briefly the other grounds of invalidity.
Unregistrability: section 18(1)(a)
[42]
The registration of a trademark is invalid if the trademark was not registrable at the date of registration. In order to determine if a trademark was registrable, we need to refer to ss. 12 to 15 of the
Act
which deal with registrable trademark (see Annex I).
[43]
In summary, it can be said that according to ss. 12, 13, 14, and 15, a trademark which falls into the following five categories is not registrable:
(1) a word that is merely the name or a surname of an individual who is living or has died within the preceding thirty years, with the exception at s. 12(2) and ss. 13, 14 and 15;
(2) a descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive trademark, with the exception at s. 12(2) and ss. 13, 14 and 15;
(3) the name of wares or services, with the exception at ss. 14 and 15;
(4) a trademark confusing with a registered trademark; with the exception at ss. 14 and 15; and
(5) a prohibited mark.
[44]
In the present case, after having considered all of the evidence, I do not believe that the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks enter in any of those five categories. Therefore, I conclude that the Hilfiger trademarks were registrable at the date of registration.
Abandonment: section 18(1)(c)
[45]
The abandonment of a trademark is a question of fact that must be decided case by case based on the particular circumstances. The non-use of a trademark is not sufficient to create abandonment. The absence of use must also be accompanied by an intention to abandon the trademark. Such an intention can be inferred from a long period of non-use (Richard, Hugues G., supra at page 18-3).
[46]
In the present case, I do not believe that it is necessary to spend a lot of time on this particular ground of invalidity. It is fairly obvious that the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks have not been abandoned since they are used to distinguish Tommy Hilfiger's product. Tommy Hilfger's wares are still advertised and sold everywhere in Canada. Therefore, I conclude that a claim of invalidity based on this ground could not stand.
Non-entitlement: last part of section 18
[47]
If the person or company that registered a trademark was not entitled to secure the registration, the registration of the trademark will be invalid. In the present case, at paragraph 103 of the defendants' Statement of Fact and Law, the defendants submit that the transfer between THI and THLI in 1992 and its restatement in 1993 refer only to marks for which there are registrations or applications. Consequently, they wonder how THLI became "entitled to register the mark "TOMMY HILFIGER" based on use in Canada from a prior date to the existence of the company".
[48]
After reviewing the Assignment Agreement between THI and THLI and after having taken into consideration the intention of the parties I must say that I disagree with the defendants. I am of the view that the purpose of the assignment was to transfer all of THI's intellectual property rights to THLI. The defendants recognized the effect of the transfer in the Agreed Statement of Facts (paragraph 6). Consequently, if THLI acquired every interests of Tommy Hilfiger's intellectual property rights, I conclude that THLI acquired the right to register the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks. I believe that THLI, as the owner of all Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks, acquired the right to register new trademarks.
[49]
Following this assignment THI merged with THUSA. THUSA's functions, which had previously been established through a Service Agreement (Exhibit P-15) with THLI, are to provide services to THLI and to facilitate the licencing of the TH Intellectual Property. The nature of the services provided by THUSA to THLI have not changed since the merger. Therefore, it demonstrates that THI really transferred all of its rights to THLI including the capacity of registering trademarks since it is not exercising any of its past functions.
[50]
In summary, all of the trademarks registered by THLI cannot be expunged pursuant to the last part of s. 18 of the
Act
because THLI acquired the right to register Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks through the transfer that occurred in 1992.
Non distinctiveness: paragraph 18(1)(b)
A. Introduction
[51]
The registration of a trademark is invalid if the trademark is not distinctive. The definition of "distinctive" in s. 2 of the
Act
reads as follows:
"'distinctive', in relation to a trademark, means a trademark that actually distinguishes the wares or services in association with which it is used by its owner from the wares or services of others or is adapted so to distinguish them;"
"'distinctive' Relativement à une marque de commerce, celle qui distingue véritablement les marchandises ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée par son propriétaire, des marchandises ou services d'autres propriétaires, ou qui est adaptée à les distinguer ainsi."
[52]
The function and the purpose of a trademark is to indicate the source of the goods. A trademark by definition must be and remain distinctive of a single source. In
Molson Breweries, A  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 481 (T.D.), Dubé, J., stated that distinctiveness requires that:
1. a mark and a product be associated;
2. the owner uses this association between the mark and its product and is manufacturing and selling this product; and
3. this association enables the owner to distinguish its product from that of others (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  inherent distinctiveness and acquired distinctiveness. A mark is distinctive when nothing about it refers the customers to a multitude of sources. Consequently, when a mark is a unique or invented name, such that it could only refer to one thing, it is possible to conclude that it is inherently distinctive. When a trademark does not have inherent distinctiveness, it may still acquire distinctiveness through continual use in the marketplace. However, to establish that distinctiveness has been acquired, it must be shown that the mark has become known to consumers as originating from one particular source.
[54]
In order to successfully establish that a trademark is invalid under this section, the trademark must be non-distinctive at the date of the commencement of the proceeding when the question of validity of the registration is alleged (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 43 C.P.R. 1).
[55]
Fox states in
Canadian Law of Trademarks and Unfair Competition
(3rd Ed.), Toronto, Carswell Co. Ltd., 1972 at page 24:
"[...] No registration is invalid under s. 18 merely because the trade mark was not distinctive at the time of registration. It may have acquired distinctiveness at the time proceedings bringing the validity of the registration into question are commenced, in which case it cannot be expunged on the ground of invalidity based upon non-distinctiveness because not only does s. 18(1)(b) provide otherwise but s. 56(1) [now s. 57(1)] allows consideration of validity only at the date of the application to strike out or amend."
[56]
As I understand this paragraph, it confirms the test of "distinctiveness" as of the date of commencement of the action for expungement. Consequently, it can be held that a mark, which was not distinctive at registration may have become distinctive in the meantime through the nature of its use by its owner.
[57]
Therefore, even if the defendants could demonstrate that the Hilfiger trademarks were not distinctive at the date of its registration, they would still be required to demonstrate that the trademarks were still not distinctive at the time the action was brought or that they have lost their distinctiveness.
[58]
Distinctiveness is a question of fact with the test being whether a clear message has been given to the public that the wares with which the trademark is associated and used are the wares of the trademark owner and not those of another party (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 94 (T.D.), at 109-111).
[59]
The determination of whether a trademark is distinctive is a question that can only be settled by considering the whole of the circumstances of the case (Fox, supra, at page 27):
"In considering distinctiveness it is not proper to dissect a mark and to examine its component parts. It is the combination of the elements that constitutes a trade mark and gives distinctiveness to it and it is the effect of the trademark as a whole - the totality - rather than any particular element in it that must be considered. [...]"
B. Parties Submissions
i) Plaintiffs
[60]
The plaintiffs allege that the defendants have the onus to establish that the trademarks were invalid:
a) at the date of registration if the defendant is claiming that the trademarks were not registrable; or
b) at the date of the commencement of the counterclaim if the defendant is claiming that the trademarks are not distinctive.
[61]
They submit that the distinctiveness of a trademark depends on all the surrounding circumstances. They refer to the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Molson Breweries, A  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 180 (F.C.A.), at 203, to establish that the exclusive use of a trademark may be compelling evidence of its distinctiveness but that exclusive use is not required to prove distinctiveness.
[62]
They conclude that the defendants have not adduced any evidence to demonstrate as a fact that the Tommy Hilfiger trademarks are not distinctive or have lost their distinctiveness.
ii) Defendants
[63]
The defendants argue that the Hilfiger trademarks have lost their distinctiveness and consequently, that they should be expunged. They contend that a trademark may lose distinctiveness as a result of genericism, multiple users, change of product origin and as a result of functional or ornamental use (
Heintzman v. 751056 Ontario Ltd. et al.
(1990), 38 F.T.R. 210; 34 C.P.R.(3d) 1 (T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 472 (T.D.)).
[64]
I believe that the relevant facts regarding the loss of distinctiveness can be summarized as follows. A first licence was granted to THC by THI in 1990 (the geographical licence). Then, in 1992, THI transferred its right to THLI. Following this transfer, THLI became the owner of all intellectual property rights and licences previously detained by THI. In 1994 THI merged with THUSA. In 1995 THLI amended its licence with THC (the Canadian Retail Licence). After a reorganization of THC in January 2001, the Canadian Retail Licence was transferred to a new division of the THC: THC Retail.
[65]
Before getting into the analysis of the distinctiveness, it is important to understand that there is a clear distinction between a transfer and a licence. This distinction can easily be acknowledged from the wording used in ss. 48 and 50 of the
Act
. Accordingly, a licence does not confer any property right in the property that is subject to the licence; it is merely a right to use someone else's property for a certain period of time or/and upon certain conditions. On the other hand a transfer consist of the assignment of all or part of the previous owner's rights and interest to the new owner.
a) Transfer
[66]
In the case at hand, two transfers occurred. The first one happened in 1992 between THI and THLI and the second one in 2001 between THC and THC Retail. The 1992 transfer was reiterated in 1993 in respect of the Canadian Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks and their goodwill.
- Transfer between THC and THC Retail (2001)
[67]
The defendants argue that because of the reorganization of THC in January 2001, where portions of its business were transferred to THC Retail and THC Sales, none of the trademarks at issue were, at the time of the commencement of the proceeding, distinctive of the plaintiffs' wares. In other words, the defendants argue that because the transfer was "untrammeled", it caused the marks to lose distinctiveness. The defendants allege that because of the transfer, it was impossible to know who the owner of the trademarks was. Section 48 of the
Act
reads as follows:
"TRANSFER
Trademark transferable
"48(1) A trademark, whether registered or unregistered, is transferable, and deemed always to have been transferable, either in connection with or separately from the goodwill of the business and in respect of either all or some of the wares or services in association with which it has been used.
Where two or more persons interested
"(2) Nothing in subsection (1) prevents a trademark from being held not to be distinctive if as a result of a transfer thereof there subsisted rights in two or more persons to the use of confusing trademarks and the rights were exercised by those persons."
"TRANSFERT
Une marque de commerce est transférable
"48(1) Une marque de commerce, déposée ou non, est transférable et est réputée avoir toujours été transférable, soit à l'égard de l'achalandage de l'entreprise, soit isolément, et soit à l'égard de la totalité, soit à l'égard de quelques-uns des services ou marchandises en liaison avec lesquels elle a été employée.
Dans le cas de deux ou plusieurs personnes intéressées
"(2) Le paragraphe (1) n'a pas pour effet d'empêcher qu'une marque de commerce soit considérée comme n'étant pas distinctive si, par suite de son transfert, il subsistait des droits, chez deux ou plusieurs personnes, à l'emploi de marques de commerce créant de la confusion et si ces droits ont été exercés par ces personnes."
[68]
I admit that it is possible that as a result of a transfer that the right to use a trademark may subsist in two or more persons, therefore, creating some confusion as of what is the source of the product. Such confusion may have the effect of interfering with the trademark distinctiveness.
[69]
In the case at bar, I disagree with the defendants for the following reason. The transfer was not made between companies that had absolutely no link. Those companies are all subsidiaries of TH Corp. This transfer occurred following the reorganization of THC. The company to which the licence was transferred is still a Tommy Hilfiger company. Therefore, I cannot conclude that it could or had created confusion regarding the source of the wares.
[70]
I am of the view that the transfer between THC and THC Retail has not caused the marks to lose distinctiveness. In order for a mark to lose its distinctiveness, the transfer must create a confusion in the customer's mind regarding the source of the product. In the present case, the source of the wares is Tommy Hilfiger and because the transfer was made to a subsidiary of Tommy Hilfiger, I do not believe that a customer would have been confused about the origin of the wares. In addition, the defendants did not present any evidence to establish that a confusion in regard of the source of the product occurred.
- Transfer between THI and THLI (1992)
[71]
The defendants also contend that because the 1992 assignment to THLI did not transfer the goodwill that the transfer was not valid (paragraph 106 of the defendants' Statement of Fact and Law).
[72]
To be valid a transfer does not have to include goodwill. Historically, at common law, a trademark was only transferable together with the goodwill of the business with respect to which it had been used, since a trademark could not stand alone (Richard, Hugues G., supra at 48-2 referring to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.), Clauson, J. (H.C.J. - Ch. D.), at 222). Since the function of a trademark was to indicate the source or origin of the goods to which it was attached, the mere assignment of a trademark, unrelated with any business, was not permitted, and was deemed to impair its distinctiveness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  assignments may now be valid even though the goodwill is not transferred (s. 48(1) of the
Act
).
b) Licencing
[73]
Section 50 of the
Act
provides that the owner of a trademark may allow another person to use his trademark and such use will not impair the distinctiveness of the trademark provided that the other person is a licensee in accordance with this section. Such licensed use is deemed to be used by the owner.
[74]
Section 50 reads as follows:
"LICENCES
Licence to use trademark
"50(1) For the purposes of this Act, if an entity is licensed by or with the authority of the owner of a trademark to use the trademark in a country and the owner has, under the licence, direct or indirect control of the character or quality of the wares or services, then the use, advertisement or display of the trademark in that country as or in a trademark, trade-name or otherwise by that entity has, and is deemed always to have had, the same effect as such a use, advertisement or display of the trademark in that country by the owner.
Idem
"(2) For the purposes of this Act, to the extent that public notice is given of the fact that the use of a trademark is a licensed use and of the identity of the owner, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proven, that the use is licensed by the owner of the trademark and the character or quality of the wares or services is under the control of the owner.
Owner may be required to take proceedings
"(3) Subject to any agreement subsisting between an owner of a trademark and a licensee of the trademark, the licensee may call on the owner to take proceedings for infringement thereof, and, if the owner refuses or neglects to do so within two months after being so called on, the licensee may institute proceedings for infringement in the licensee's own name as if the licensee were the owner, making the owner a defendant."
"LICENCES
Licence d'emploi d'une marque de commerce
"50(1) Pour l'application de la présente loi, si une licence d'emploi d'une marque de commerce est octroyée, pour un pays, à une entité par le propriétaire de la marque, ou avec son autorisation, et que celui-ci, aux termes de la licence, contrôle, directement ou indirectement, les caractéristiques ou la qualité des marchandises et services, l'emploi, la publicité ou l'exposition de la marque, dans ce pays, par cette entité comme marque de commerce, nom commercial -- ou partie de ceux-ci -- ou autrement ont le même effet et sont réputés avoir toujours eu le même effet que s'il s'agissait de ceux du propriétaire.
Licence d'emploi d'une marque de commerce
"(2) Pour l'application de la présente loi, dans la mesure où un avis public a été donné quant à l'identité du propriétaire et au fait que l'emploi d'une marque de commerce fait l'objet d'une licence, cet emploi est réputé, sauf preuve contraire, avoir fait l'objet d'une licence du propriétaire, et le contrôle des caractéristiques ou de la qualité des marchandises et services est réputé, sauf preuve contraire, être celui du propriétaire.
Action par le propriétaire
"(3) Sous réserve de tout accord encore valide entre lui et le propriétaire d'une marque de commerce, le licencié peut requérir le propriétaire d'intenter des procédures pour usurpation de la marque et, si celui-ci refuse ou néglige de le faire dans les deux mois suivant cette réquisition, il peut intenter ces procédures en son propre nom comme s'il était propriétaire, faisant du propriétaire un défendeur."
[75]
This section requires that two conditions be met in order for the use, the advertisement and the display of the trademark by the licensee be deemed made by the owner. Those two conditions are: (1) the existence of a licence and (2) the existence of a certain control over the character and the quality of the wares.
[76]
In the present case, there is one licence that is of high interest. This licence was granted to THC in 1990 by THI (the geographical licence) and was later amended by THLI in 1995 (the Canadian Retail Licence). The defendants argue that the evidence concerning the geographical licence demonstrate that THI only licenced THC to use a trademark that was not registered; the "TOMMY HILFIGER" trademarks. They submit that the use by THC of other Tommy Hilfiger trademarks without proper consent caused the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks to have lost their distinctiveness because it misled the public in regard of the source (paragraph 106 of the defendants' Statement of Fact and Law).
[77]
In response, the plaintiffs allege that they have used the shorthand "TOMMY HILFIGER" when referring to the trademarks in order to include all of the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks. The plaintiffs submit that their intention was not to limit the licensee from using the trademarks.
[78]
On the first point, I must say that I favour the plaintiffs' submissions. I believe that the shorthand "TOMMY HILFIGER" to define all of the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks registered at that time makes sense. As of the date of the licencing, no trademark had been registered for the name "TOMMY HILFIGER". Therefore it is reasonable to believe that the plaintiffs would have used this shorthand in order to simplify the licensing. Because the name "TOMMY HILFIGER" was registered as a trademark in 1994, it is reasonable to infer that the definition of trademark in s. 1.3 of the geographical licence had to be modified and enlarged in 1995 in order to prevent any misinterpretation of the geographical licence.
[79]
On the second issue, I do not believe that it would be possible for the public to be confused about the source or the origin of the wares. Obviously, THI, THLI and THC are all TH Corp. subsidiaries. The origin of the wares would not be a source of confusion through the eyes of an average customer. It does not matter which subsidiary company has the licence or has granted the licence; it is still a Tommy Hilfiger product, controlled, sold and advertised by a Tommy Hilfiger company.
[80]
The defendants argue at paragraph 106 of their Statement of Fact and Law that because THLI does not manufacture the goods that such flaw is fatal to its registration. Later on, in paragraph 114 to 118, they submit that the quality control done on behalf of the owner THLI by its parent company is insufficient to meet the quality control requirement of s. 50 of the
Act
. Quality control is the most important element when it comes to licencing. This section is silent as to how quality control is to be carried out. Therefore, we need to look at the quality control process that was established in the present case.
[81]
THUSA signed a Service Agreement (Exhibit P-15, p. 2) with THLI in 1992 in which it had the following obligations:
"[...]
(v) Coordinate design and execution of licensed products.
(vi) Review samples of licensed products prior to and periodically during the manufacturing process to preserve and ensure product integrity and quality.
(vii) Plan and coordinate construction of licensees' dedicated Tommy Hilfiger showrooms.
(viii) Coordinate product launches.
(ix) Plan and execute advertising and promotional plans and programs. [...]"
[82]
Since the merger of THI with THUSA in 1994, THUSA's functions have not changed. THLI does control the character and quality of the wares. Even if quality control is executed by another Tommy Hilfiger subsidiary, it does not mean that a lack of quality control exists. To the contrary, in the present case, THLI has a Service Agreement to ensure that the control is present. Since this control was established according to certain guidelines, I have no problem concluding that THLI does control the quality of the product even though it does not manufacture the goods. The delegation of such an obligation is not fatal to the licence and the registration.
[83]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Thurlow, J., mentioned that the use by a registered owner (now a licensee) has the same effect as use by the owner. He however held that it does not mean that the owner must be deemed to be engaged in the manufacture, sale, leasing or hiring of the wares or the performances of the services in association with which the trademark is used.
c) Conclusion
[84]
In the present case, the defendants have not proven that the trademarks were not distinctive at the beginning of the proceeding. The evidence shows that the plaintiffs' trademarks are distinctive. Flag design is an integral part of all promotion of the Tommy Hilfiger Brand (Allan Abramowicz's examination, November 24, 2003, pages 116 to 118). As of mid-2001, the Hilfiger logo had gained sufficient notoriety in Canada in association with articles of clothing that the use of the logo or perceived variations of the logo in association with articles of clothing was capable of causing a statistically significant misapprehension among the clothing purchasing public that such articles of clothing were made or licensed by Tommy Hilfiger (Dr. Corbin's affidavit and her examination on November 25, 2003).
[85]
Therefore, I agree with the decision held by the United Stated District Court in
United States District Court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B-14.) that the Hilfiger marks are presumptively strong marks.
[86]
Having said that, I conclude that the arguments of invalidity under s. 18 of the
Act
, must therefore be dismissed.
Issue 2: Infringement under s. 19 of the Act
[87]
Section 19 of the
Act
reads:
"19. Subject to sections 21, 32 and 67, the registration of a trademark in respect of any wares or services, unless shown to be invalid, gives to the owner of the trademark the exclusive right to the use throughout Canada of the trademark in respect of those wares or services."
"19. Sous réserve des articles 21, 32 et 67, l'enregistrement d'une marque de commerce à l'égard de marchandises ou services, sauf si son invalidité est démontrée, donne au propriétaire le droit exclusif à l'emploi de celle-ci, dans tout le Canada, en ce qui concerne ces marchandises ou services."
[88]
Section 19 applies in an action where it is established that a person other than the registered owner or his licensee uses a trademark as registered for any of the wares or services covered by the registered trademark. In other words, a defendant's unauthorized use of the
identical
trademark registered by a plaintiff in association with any identical wares or services constitutes an infringement, provided that the defendant used his design as a trademark according to s. 2.
[89]
I will deal with the "use as a trademark" issue (which is also an element to be proven in a s. 20 infringement) and will then come to the question of whether the Explore Canada logo is identical with TMA '095. According to s. 2, a trademark is a "mark that is used by a person for the purpose of distinguishing or so as to distinguish wares or services manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by him from those manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by others". In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Federal Court of Appeal reiterated the principle that, in determining whether a mark has been used as a trademark, the user's intention or public recognition is sufficient to demonstrate that the mark has been used as a trademark. The Court went on to state, at paragraph 44, that a trial judge's finding of confusion under s. 6(5) constitutes a finding that the defendant's design would be recognized by the public as an indication that the wares associated with the design were those of the applicant. In the case at bar, I come to the conclusion that there is confusion between the Explore Canada logo and the Hilfiger trademarks, as explained in further details in the section of this judgment dealing with the s. 20 infringement. I am therefore warranted in concluding, in light of
International Clothiers
, that the defendants did use the Explore Canada logo as a trademark.
[90]
I now turn to the question of whether the Explore Canada logo is identical to any of the Hilfiger trademarks. The only trademark at stake here is TMA '095, a fact that the plaintiffs themselves recognize. According to the plaintiffs, the Explore Canada logo is identical to TMA '095 as the logo comprises TMA '095 i.e. same colour combination and spacial relationship of the blocks of colour. They say that Quality Goods has merely added to TMA '095 the words "Explore Canada" or generic words and a common maple leaf or other custom insignia. Since Quality Goods has used the Explore Canada logo for shirts and carrying bags, wares covered by TMA '095, the plaintiffs argue that Quality Goods has therefore infringed TMA '095.
[91]
I come to the conclusion that the Explore Canada logo is not identical to TMA '095. The latter does not show the words "Explore Canada" or the name of a city or a province on it and does not have a maple leaf symbol or another symbol in the middle of it. I would respond to the plaintiffs' argument that the basic principle of addition implies a change, even if it is a minor one, between the original product and the new one. The product that was added to cannot be said to be identical to the first product.
[92]
Consequently, I conclude that there is no infringement under s. 19.
Issue 3: Infringement under section 20 of the Act
[93]
Section 20 of the
Act
reads:
"20(1) The right of the owner of a registered trademark to its exclusive use shall be deemed to be infringed by a person not entitled to its use under this Act who sells, distributes or advertises wares or services in association with a confusing trademark or trade-name, but no registration of a trademark prevents a person from making
(a) any bona fide use of his personal name as a trade-name, or
(b) any bona fide use, other than as a trademark,
(i) of the geographical name of his place of business, or
(ii) of any accurate description of the character or quality of his wares or services,
in such a manner as is not likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attaching to the trademark."
"20(1) Le droit du propriétaire d'une marque de commerce déposée à l'emploi exclusif de cette dernière est réputé être violé par une personne non admise à l'employer selon la présente loi et qui vend, distribue ou annonce des marchandises ou services en liaison avec une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial créant de la confusion. Toutefois, aucun enregistrement d'une marque de commerce ne peut empêcher une personne:
a) d'utiliser de bonne foi son nom personnel comme nom commercial;
b) d'employer de bonne foi, autrement qu'à titre de marque de commerce:
(i) soit le nom géographique de son siège d'affaires,
(ii) soit toute description exacte du genre ou de la qualité de ses marchandises ou services,
d'une manière non susceptible d'entraîner la diminution de la valeur de l'achalandage attaché à la marque de commerce."
[94]
For s. 20 to apply, the Explore Canada logo used by the defendants as a trademark without the permission of the plaintiffs must have been confusing with the registered mark. I will analyze now each element of the infringement.
[95]
First, I already concluded, in my analysis of infringement under s. 19, that the defendants' used the Explore Canada logo as a trademark within the meaning of s. 2, i.e. the logo was "used as a mark for the purpose of distinguishing or so as to distinguish their wares from those sold ... by others". Second, it is uncontested that the sale of products showing the Explore Canada logo occurred, which represents use for the purposes of s. 4. Third, there is no question that all the Hilfiger trademarks at stake in this case were registered. Fourth, it is also uncontested that the plaintiffs had not authorized the defendants to use the Hilfiger trademarks.
[96]
I now turn to the last element that needs to be proven in order to conclude to a section 20 infringement: whether the use of the Explore Canada logo would cause confusion with the Hilfiger's trademarks. According to s. 20(1), infringement occurs when there is use made of a "confusing trademark". In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  F.T.R. 260 (T.D.), at paragraph 42, Mackay, J., describes well the concept of confusion and what proof needs to be made of it:
"The
Act
provides the meaning of 'confusion', i.e. trademarks are confusing if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares associated with the trademarks are manufactured or sold by the same person whether or not the wares are of the same general class (see s. 6(2)). In determining that matter, the Court has regard to all the surrounding circumstances including those specified in clauses (a) to (e) of s. 6(5)."
[97]
Section 6(5) provides:
"6(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade-names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade-names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade-names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade-names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
"6(5) En décidant si des marques de commerce ou des noms commerciaux créent de la confusion, le tribunal ou le registraire, selon le cas, tient compte de toutes les circonstances de l'espèce, y compris:
a) le caractère distinctif inhérent des marques de commerce ou noms commerciaux, et la mesure dans laquelle ils sont devenus connus;
b) la période pendant laquelle les marques de commerce ou noms commerciaux ont été en usage;
c) le genre de marchandises, services ou entreprises;
d) la nature du commerce;
e) le degré de ressemblance entre les marques de commerce ou les noms commerciaux dans la présentation ou le son, ou dans les idées qu'ils suggèrent."
[98]
Before turning to the analysis of the factors in s. 6(5), I would like to reiterate what the test of confusion is. I will borrow the words of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 51 (F.C.A.), at paragraph 18:
"[...] the Court is to put itself in the position of an average person who is familiar with the earlier mark but has an imperfect recollection of it; [...] the question is whether the ordinary consumer will, on seeing the later mark, infer as a matter of first impression that the wares with which the second mark is used are in some way associated with the wares of the earlier."
It should also be said that it is not necessary to prove that confusion has actually occurred in the marketplace but merely that confusion is likely to occur.
[99]
As to the factors set out by s. 6(5), my analysis and conclusions are as follows. Unless specifically indicated, the analysis of the five different factors of confusion applies to all of the Hilfiger trademarks in this case.
Paragraph 6(5)(a): The inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade-names and the extent to which they have become known
[100]
The first factor has to do with the strength of the marks. The inherent distinctiveness of a trademark refers to its originality.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 182 (T.D.), at paragraph 119, Tremblay-Lamer, J., stated:
"The inherent distinctiveness of a mark refers to its
originality
. A mark that is composed of a
unique or invented name, such that it can only refer to one thing, will possess more inherent distinctiveness than a word that is commonly used in the trade
." (My emphasis)
[101]
An original design is inherently distinctive and considered a strong mark, as stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.), at paragraph 18:
"It is well established that
a trade mark consisting of
a striking inventive name or
an original design is inherently distinctive and is considered a strong mark. As such, it is entitled to a wide scope of protection. This is especially so if it has become well known through usage.
On the other hand, if a mark lacks these exceptional qualities in design or wording, it is inherently less distinctive and is considered a weaker mark. The ambit of protection afforded to a weak mark is much less than for a strong mark, and registration of other marks containing comparatively small differences may be permitted." (My emphasis)
[102]
I am convinced that the Hilfiger flag design is inherently distinctive as it is not descriptive of the clothing line or other products it designates - rather, it consists in an arbitrary combination and spacial relationship of blocks of color. This fact makes the Hilfiger flag design, prima facie, a strong mark. The Explore Canada logo is inherently distinctive for the same reasons the Hilfiger flag design is, since both are very similar in shape and color.
[103]
As to the extent to which both trademarks have become known, also called "acquired distinctiveness", this distinctiveness is acquired through use in the marketplace. It must be shown that the trademark has become known as originating from one particular source.
[104]
The Hilfiger trademarks have acquired great distinctiveness through extensive publicity and promotion campaigns. By 1996, when the Explore Canada logo was created and used, the Hilfiger trademarks were already well-known. The sales figures for the Hilfiger products in Canada in the 90s and the beginning of the next century are an indication of how well-known Hilfiger trademarks were: 1992: $8 million; 1996: $25 million; 2001: $125 million. The Explore Canada logo has been used in Canada and has therefore become known but not to the same extent as the Hilfiger's trademarks. One only needs to consider that no consumer advertising or major promotion was made for the Explore Canada products, which were only advertised in catalogues distributed to retail customers and in semi-annual gift trade shows. The sales figures of Explore Canada products - approximately $2 million from the creation of the Explore Canada logo to 2001 - can also be compared with those of Hilfiger products. I conclude that the distinctiveness factor favours the plaintiffs.
Paragraph 6(5)(b): The length of time the trademarks or trade-names have been in use
[105]
The length of time a trademark has been in use is the next factor in determining confusion. As Tremblay-Lamer, J., states  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraph 135:
"The length of time that a mark has been used is a factor which will contribute to confusion on behalf of the consumer in determining the origin of wares or services.
A trademark that is newly adopted or registered only recently may be presumed not to have received wide public acceptance
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). On the other hand,
a mark that has been used for a long time is presumed to have made a certain impression amongst consumers which must be given some weight
(
Pink Panther Beauty Corp.
, supra)." (My emphasis)
[106]
Since the early nineties, THC commenced selling wares bearing TMA '827, and in 1993, 1994 and 1995, wares bearing TMA '095 and TMA '291 (Mr. Green and Abramowitz testimony), the other two trademarks TMA '283 and '082 in 1997. Quality Goods first began to offer for sale and sell its Explore Canada products in Canada in 1996. This factor clearly favours the plaintiffs for TMA '827, TMA '095, TMA '291 and this factor favours the defendants with respect to TMA '283, TMA '082 as the defendants started using their Explore Canada logo before those trademarks.
Paragraph 6(5)(c): The nature of the wares, services or business
[107]
It is not necessary to find that the business of the plaintiffs and Quality Goods actually overlap to find a likelihood of confusion. Section 6(2) provides that confusion may result "whether or not the wares are of the same general class". The Federal Court of Appeal explained in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 381 (F.C.A.), at paragraph 14:
"For a likelihood of confusion to be found, it is not necessary that the parties operate in the same general field or industry, or that the services be of the same type or quality. Trade marks for wares and services of one quality intended for one class of purchasers may be confusing with trade marks for wares and services of a different type or quality, intended for a different class of purchasers."
[108]
TMA '827 covers clothing for men, namely pants, jackets, shorts, suits, sweaters, sweatpants, sweatshorts, bathing suits, robes, coats, jackets, raincoats, undershirts. TMA '095 covers, amongst other things, clothing for men and women, namely shirts, pants, jackets, sweaters, shorts, belts, vests, sport jackets, coats, raincoats, parkas. TMA '291 covers blazers, coats, jackets, jeans, overcoats, pants, parkas, shirts, shorts, sportcoats, sportjackets, sweaters, turtlenecks, vests, bathing suits, caps, socks, suits, sweatpants, sweatshirts, ties, undershirts, underwear. Quality Goods has, in association with the Explore Canada logo, offered for sale and sold soft goods namely t-shirts, golf shirts, sweatshirts, caps, toques, scarves, headbands, outerwear (i.e. ski jackets), backpacks, waist bags, duffel bags and shopping bags, and hard goods namely mugs, pens, key chains, licence plates, playing cards, magnets, hockey pucks, lapel pins, coasters, ashtrays, beer steins, shooter and shot glasses. In summary, there is an obvious overlap of wares, i.e. t-shirts, golf shirts, sweatshirts and outerwear, between the Hilfiger trademarks '827, '095 and '291 and the Explore Canada logo.
[109]
It should be noted though that despite the fact that THC distributes and sells promotional items including mugs, pens and key chains, the trademarks registration does not cover these wares. As a result, despite the overlap in the sale of mugs, pens and key chains by both parties, this overlap cannot be taken into account in favour of the plaintiffs.
[110]
As for the wares associated with TMA '283 (cosmetics; perfumery; toiletries; suntan lotions; bronzing sticks; soap products and hair care products) and with TMA '082 (cosmetics; perfumery; toiletries; suntan lotions; bronzing sticks; soap products and hair care products), they are not similar to the wares sold in association with the Explore Canada logo.
[111]
In conclusion, there is a clear overlap in the nature of some of the Hilfiger products used in association with TMA '827, TMA '095 and TMA '291 with Explore Canada products which means that, for these three trademarks, the factor related to the nature of the wares favours the plaintiffs.
Paragraph 6(5)(d): The nature of the trade
[112]
The trade in which the wares or services circulate is also a factor in the confusion analysis. The risk of confusion is greater where the wares or services, though dissimilar, are distributed in the same types of stores. The Hilfiger products are sold in upscale retailers comprised of chain stores, specialty stores, duty free shops and other large department stores selected for their image, location and brand selection. The Explore Canada products are sold in low end tourist shops, specialty stores such as United Cigar Stores, and duty free shops. The wares of both parties are sold across Canada and the nature of the trade overlaps with both of these wares sold in duty shops and specialty stores. This factor favours the plaintiffs.
Paragraph 6(5)(e): The degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade-names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them
[113]
In considering the resemblance between trademarks for the purpose of determining whether the trademarks are confusing, the Court must consider them in their entirety and not dissect them and put itself in the position of an average consumer who is familiar with the earliest mark but has an imperfect recollection of it. Nevertheless, it is possible to focus on particular features of a mark that may have a determinative influence on the public's perception of it.
[114]
With this factor, TMA '291, i.e. the name TOMMY HILFIGER, is clearly not at stake in this proceeding as this trademark consists only of a name, while the Explore Canada logo consists of a rectangle with colors and words in it. As for TMA '827 and TMA '082, they are somewhat similar to the Explore Canada logo as they consist of the same rectangle with the same association and spacing of colors, but the words "TOMMY HILFIGER" and "EXPLORE CANADA" (or other regional designation) create a clear visual distinction between the two Hilfiger trademarks and the Explore Canada logo. The main Hilfiger trademark at stake with regards to the degree of visual resemblance with the Explore Canada logo is TMA '095, which consists of a rectangle containing colors but no words. The Explore Canada logo consists of exactly the same rectangle in terms of spacial arrangement and colors as TMA '095. The only additions in the defendants' design are a maple leaf or other insignia in the middle of the rectangle and the words "Explore Canada" or a regional designation in the upper and lower parts of the rectangle. I conclude that the Explore Canada logo bears a high degree of visual resemblance with TMA '095, especially in light of the "consumer's imperfect recollection" test. I do not see how the marks in issue in this case could bear ideas that would need to be compared. In relation to TMA '095, the factor pertaining to the degree of resemblance therefore favours the plaintiffs.
Surrounding circumstances
[115]
In addition to the five factors enumerated in s. 6(5), the
Act
directs the Court to consider all the surrounding circumstances. In the case at bar, the plaintiffs argue three additional factors.
[116]
First, they state that Quality Goods' refusal to disclose the results of the legal advice it sought in 1996 with regards to the use of the Explore Canada logo warrants an inference that the advice was that the logo might infringe the Hilfiger trademarks. The only Canadian caselaw cited by the plaintiffs on this issue,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 209 (F.C.A.), is irrelevant as it does not deal with solicitor-client privilege in the context of legal advice sought or given but rather with the plaintiffs' failure to call the designer to testify as to the date of creation of the design. I therefore draw no adverse inference from the fact that the defendants did not submit in evidence the results of the solicitor-client privileged legal advice they sought.
[117]
Second, the plaintiffs rely on a survey conducted by their expert witness, Dr. Ruth Corbin, in another infringement case involving Hilfiger. In 2001, approximately 300 persons in four malls across Canada were shown a pair of jeans with a logo and a second pair of jeans. The purpose of the survey was to measure the extent to which the clothing purchasing public perceived that two pairs of jeans, marked with Boxer America in different logo designs, are manufactured or licensed by Tommy Hilfiger.
[118]
I agree with the defendants' expert witness, Darrel Bricker, that even though the Boxer America survey follows the basic rules for conducting consumer surveys on general trademark issues, the survey offers no meaningful insight on the issues to be determined in the case at bar except for the evidence that as of mid-2001, the Hilfiger logo had gained sufficient notoriety in Canada in association with articles of clothing that the use of the logo or perceived variations of the logo in association with articles of clothing was capable of causing a statistically significant misapprehension among the clothing purchasing public that such articles of clothing were made or licensed by Tommy Hilfiger (Dr. Corbin's affidavit and her examination on November 25, 2003). The survey did not target tourists, which is the target population in this case, but rather the general clothing purchasers or jeans purchasers in areas that are not high traffic tourist areas. The survey did not use the defendants' products to make the comparison and used a type of ware, i.e. jeans, that is not even sold by Quality Goods. Quality Goods sells t-shirts, not jeans. For the above-mentioned reasons, the survey cannot be given any weight in the case at bar apart from the exception noted above.
[119]
Third, the plaintiffs offered Mr. David Livingstone as an expert. The defendants did not agree that this witness should be qualified as an expert. After a review of his curriculum vitae, I concluded that his testimony could be helpful in this case. However, on cross-examination, he had to admit that he did not know when the Hilfiger flag design was created. He had no scientific data to support his allegations. He did not know when sales of Hilfiger garments started in Canada and how much they were sold for. Talking about the hip-hop culture, he had no statistics, no data. The same is for the awareness of the public for the Hilfiger logo. He had made no research before signing his affidavit. Therefore, I disregard his entire testimony because I find that it is not convincing and probing evidence.
[120]
The plaintiffs did not present any evidence of actual confusion. Nicola Bavaro, a THC director in Montreal, did mention an incident where a client of a store called Galaxi Blue complained about the Explore Canada products but as Mr. Bavaro did not recall the name of the Galaxi Blue owner and as the store is now closed, no weight can be given to that isolated, unsubstantiated incident.
Conclusion as to the likelihood of confusion
[121]
I have taken into account all five factors indicated in s. 6(5) but find that, in four cases, one factor clearly disqualifies a finding that there is a likelihood of confusion.
[122]
Because of the important visual difference between TMA '291 and the Explore Canada logo (TMA '291 is only a word, not a rectangle with colors), I cannot come to the conclusion that the Explore Canada logo infringes TMA '291. I also come to the same conclusion with respect to TMA '827 (rectangle with colors and the words "Tommy Hilfiger"), though this situation is not as clear cut as that with TMA '291. TMA '827 presents a rather important visual difference that would prevent a likelihood of confusion in a consumer's mind, i.e. the words "Tommy Hilfiger" which are obviously very different from the words found on the defendants' wares, i.e. "Explore Canada" or another regional designation.
[123]
Because of the obvious difference in the nature of the wares registered in association with TMA '283 and TMA '082 (cosmetics; perfumery; toiletries; suntan lotions; bronzing sticks; soap products and hair care products in both cases) compared to the wares sold by Quality Goods (shirts, caps, toques, scarves, headbands, outerwear, bags, mugs, pens, key chains, licence plates, playing cards, magnets, hockey pucks, etc.), I find that there is no likelihood of confusion between TMA '283 and TMA '082 and the Explore Canada logo on Quality Goods' products.
[124]
I now turn to the last Hilfiger trademark. I find that the Explore Canada logo does create a likelihood of confusion with Hilfiger's TMA '095 (rectangle with colors without the words "Tommy Hilfiger"). Looking at the first element in the confusion analysis, the Hilfiger trademarks is a strong mark because of its originality in design and its acquired distinctiveness through years of extensive publicity and sales. TMA '095 was registered and used a few years (1994) before Quality Goods started using its Explore Canada logo (1996). Some of the wares sold by both parties in association with their respective mark are exactly the same (t-shirts, sweaters, etc.). There is an overlap of some of the stores through which products by both parties are sold (e.g. duty shops and specialty stores). Finally, the degree of visual resemblance is very high, as the only difference between TMA '095 and the Explore Canada logo is the addition, on the latter, of the words "Explore Canada" or a regional designation and of the maple leaf or another insignia in the middle of the rectangle. In light of these five factors, I conclude that the Explore Canada logo is likely to cause confusion with TMA '095 and therefore infringes s. 20 of the
Act
. In other words, I am satisfied that a probable consumer in a tourist shop who saw in 1996, or even now, an Explore Canada t-shirt for example, would think, as a matter of first impression, that he or she is looking at a Tommy Hilfiger t-shirt that is being sold at a good price. In sum, the Explore Canada logo infringes s. 20 of the
Act
as it is likely to cause confusion with TMA '095.
Issue 4: Depreciation of the value of the goodwill under s. 22 of the Act
[125]
Section 22 of the
Act
reads:
"22(1) No person shall use a trademark registered by another person in a manner that is likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attaching thereto.
"(2) In any action in respect of a use of a trademark contrary to subsection (1), the court may decline to order the recovery of damages or profits and may permit the defendant to continue to sell wares marked with the trademark that were in his possession or under his control at the time notice was given to him that the owner of the registered trademark complained of the use of the trademark."
"22(1) Nul ne peut employer une marque de commerce déposée par une autre personne d'une manière susceptible d'entraîner la diminution de la valeur de l'achalandage attaché à cette marque de commerce.
"(2) Dans toute action concernant un emploi contraire au paragraphe (1), le tribunal peut refuser d'ordonner le recouvrement de dommages-intérêts ou de profits, et permettre au défendeur de continuer à vendre toutes marchandises revêtues de cette marque de commerce qui étaient en sa possession ou sous son contrôle lorsque avis lui a été donné que le propriétaire de la marque de commerce déposée se plaignait de cet emploi."
[126]
In order to prove the depreciation of the value of its goodwill, a plaintiff needs to show that the defendant used, within the meaning of use under s. 4, the plaintiff's registered trademark. Second, the plaintiff needs to show that such use is likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attached to its trademark. As stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 348 (T.D.), at paragraph 31, there is no requirement that the trademark be "used as a trademark" under s. 2.
[127]
There is no doubt that Quality Goods used a mark similar to the plaintiffs' registered trademarks, which evoked a connection in the mind of the public. The question then becomes whether such use is likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attached to the plaintiffs' trademarks.
[128]
As stated  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  International Corp.
at paragraph 41, goodwill is the reputation that has been built up by the owner of the trademark through years of honest work or substantial expenditure of money, with the consequent advantage that the wares or services provided by the owner are associated with the trademark.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 224 (T.D.), goodwill is defined as "the benefit and advantage of the good name, reputation and connection of a business, the attractive force which brings in customers, and the one thing that distinguishes an old-established business from a new business at its first start".
[129]
Depreciating of the value of the goodwill occurs "whether it arises through
reduction of the esteem in which the mark itself is held
or through the
direct persuasion and enticing of customers who could otherwise be expected to buy or continue to buy goods bearing the trademark
" (
Clairol International Corp.
, supra at paragraph 42). There is no requirement to show a likelihood of confusion in order to prove a likelihood of depreciation of the value of the goodwill. However, the potential for confusion may have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill of a registered trademark (
ITV  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraph 195).
[130]
The plaintiffs argue that Quality Goods sought to cash in on THLI's established reputation with the result that the exclusivity of the association of the Hilfiger flag design with the Tommy Hilfiger brand and image was impaired. As a result, the plaintiffs say, the esteem in which the Hilfiger flag trademarks was held by the customers familiar with those trademarks was reduced.
[131]
I accept that consumers will probably make a connection in their mind between the Explore Canada products and Hilfiger. However, it is not sufficient to simply state that that mental connection will reduce the esteem in which consumers hold the Hilfiger trademarks. The depreciation of the value of the goodwill attached to a trademark is a somewhat intangible concept that can be at times hard to prove. Some elements of proof must be presented to the Court to show that there is, indeed, at least a likelihood that a negative impression would be left in the mind of the consumer, and what that negative impression would be, or else, some elements of proof must be presented showing there is a likelihood of direct persuasion and enticing of customers who could otherwise be expected to buy or continue to buy goods bearing the trademark.
[132]
In the case at bar, I was presented with absolutely no evidence showing a likelihood of the depreciation of the goodwill attached to the Hilfiger trademarks. I therefore conclude that the defendants' use of the Explore Canada logo has not depreciated the value of the goodwill attached to Hilfiger's registered trademarks, and there is no infringement of s. 22.
Issue 5: Passing-off under paragraph 7(b) of the Act
[133]
Paragraph 7(b) of the
Act
reads:
"7. No person shall
. . . . .
(b) direct public attention to his wares, services or business in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada, at the time he commenced so to direct attention to them, between his wares, services or business and the wares, services or business of another; [...]"
"7. Nul ne peut:
. . . . .
b) appeler l'attention du public sur ses marchandises, ses services ou son entreprise de manière à causer ou à vraisemblablement causer de la confusion au Canada, lorsqu'il a commencé à y appeler ainsi l'attention, entre ses marchandises, ses services ou son entreprise et ceux d'un autre; [...]"
[134]
Paragraph 7(b) of the
Act
is a codification of the common law tort of passing-off. According to the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321, at paragraph 33, to succeed in an action for passing-off, the plaintiff must prove three components: existence of goodwill, deception of the public due to a misrepresentation and actual or potential damage to the plaintiff. In other words, the plaintiffs must establish that they had a measure of goodwill or reputation in the mind of the purchasing public, in relation to their wares associated with their Hilfiger trademarks; that Quality Goods, in the sale of its wares marked with the Explore Canada logo, would be likely to cause confusion to the purchasing public in Canada; and that the plaintiffs thereby suffered or are likely to suffer damage.
[135]
I will turn to the first element: existence of goodwill. The evidence clearly supports a conclusion that the plaintiffs had indeed established significant goodwill or reputation for their Hilfiger trademarks, by reason of their extensive advertising and substantial sales in Canada.
[136]
With respect to the second element, the likelihood that the defendants' wares would cause confusion with the plaintiffs' wares, I have already concluded in my analysis of s. 20 and s. 6(5) that there is indeed a likelihood of confusion between the Explore Canada products.
[137]
As for the third element, actual or potential damage for the plaintiffs, I find myself with the same absence of evidence as in my analysis of s. 22 with regard to the negative impact the defendants' competition had on the plaintiffs' business. Not only was I not presented with evidence quantifying the damage to the plaintiffs' interests but I was not presented with evidence showing merely the nature of the damage. The only piece of evidence that remotely touches on that point is the complaint, by a client of the Galaxi Blue store, about the Explore Canada products. But as I said earlier in this decision, the witness testifying to that effect could not recall the name of the Galaxi Blue owner and the store is now closed. As a consequence, no weight can be given to that complaint. In any case, without other evidence, this type of isolated incident would be, even if credible, highly insufficient to meet the "potential or actual damage" threshold necessary to conclude to passing-off under paragraph 7(b).
[138]
In sum, the absence of evidence with regard to potential or actual damage to the plaintiffs means that I cannot conclude the defendants were involved in passing-off under paragraph 7(b) of the
Act
.
Issue 6: Personal liability of defendant Rosen
a) Plaintiffs' submissions
[139]
The plaintiffs argue that Mr. Rosen should be held personally liable for the infringement of the Tommy Hilfiger's trademarks. They submit that:
1) Mr. Rosen is the sole shareholder and co-director of Quality Goods;
2) he was intimately involved in the creation of the Explore Canada Logo and made the ultimate decision to have Quality Goods use the logo;
3) he was personally aware of the Tommy Hilfiger trademarks.
b) Legal Context
[140]
The Ontario Court of Appeal held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(3d) 97 (C.A.), page 102:
"It is well established that the directing minds of corporations cannot be held civilly liable for the actions of the corporations they control and direct unless there is some conduct on the part of those directing minds that is either tortious in itself or exhibits a separate identity or interest from that of the corporations such as to make the acts or conduct complained of those of the directing minds: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 491; 129 D.L.R.(4th) 711 (C.A.)."
[141]
Therefore, the mere fact of exercising control in a company is not sufficient to establish personal liability. What kind of conduct can trigger personal liability? Le Dain, J.A., offers his views in
Mentmore Manufacturing Co. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 195 (F.C.A.):
"What, however, is the kind of participation in the acts of the company that should give rise to personal liability? It is an elusive question. It would appear to be that degree and kind of personal involvement by which the director or officer makes the tortious act his own. It is obviously a question of fact to be decided on the circumstances of each case. [...]"
[142]
In my opinion, there must be circumstances from which it is reasonable to conclude that the purpose of the director or officer of a company is to deliberately, willfully and knowingly pursue a course of conduct that will incite infringement or an indifference to the risk of infringement. The precise formulation of the appropriate test is obviously a difficult one. Room must be left for a broad appreciation of the circumstances of each case to determine, if there is personal liability (
Mentmore
, supra, at pages 172-174).
[143]
The evidence does not demonstrate such deliberate, willful, and knowing pursuit on the part of Mr. Rosen to infringe the plaintiffs' trademarks.
[144]
There is no convincing evidence that Mr. Rosen was at any time acting outside his capacity as a director or officer of Quality Goods. I find therefore, that there is no personal liability on the part of the defendant Rosen.
Issue 7: Counterclaim by defendant Rosen
a) Submissions of Mr. Rosen
[145]
The defendant Rosen claims damages in the amount of $1,000,000, pre- and post-judgment interest, and his costs in defending this action on a solicitor-client basis.
[146]
At the end of the fiscal year ending in September 1999, the retained earnings of the defendant Quality Goods were $3,662,709.
[147]
Immediately beforehand, in August 1999, the plaintiffs began their campaign to put an end to the "Explore Canada" logo and appropriate themselves the red, white and blue colour scheme. In August 1999, the plaintiffs or others acting on their behalf, communicated with two of the most important customers of Quality Goods, indicating that they would be the subject of legal proceedings and other harassment unless they stopped marketing the "Explore Canada" products. Both of these customers, Niagara Parks Commission and Hachett Distribution (HD) which owns the United Cigar Stores chain, stopped ordering "Explore Canada" products. In fact, HD returned such products.
[148]
Prior to the plaintiffs' campaign, sales of "Explore Canada" products represented approximately 8% of sales by Quality Goods. As a result of the intended expansion of and anticipated demand for the "Explore Canada" line, Quality Goods had increased a number of fixed costs, including inventory.
[149]
The plaintiffs, or those acting on behalf of the plaintiffs, abused their rights in making exorbitant claims with respect to the protection and infringement of their marks, knowing full well the difference in the shape and appearance of the trademarks and the difference in trade, nature of wares, and places where the wares are sold.
[150]
Moreover, even with this knowledge, the plaintiffs chose to interfere with the contractual relationships of the defendant Quality Goods, persuading HD to return goods and both HD and the Niagara Parks Commission to stop ordering goods.
[151]
In so doing, the plaintiffs abused their rights and breached paragraph 7(a) of the
Act
, in a manner that tended to discredit the business of Quality Goods. Paragraph 7(a) reads:
"7. No person shall
(a) make a false or misleading statement tending to discredit the business, wares or services of a competitor; [...]"
"7. Nul ne peut:
a) faire une déclaration fausse ou trompeuse tendant à discréditer l'entreprise, les marchandises ou les services d'un concurrent; [...]"
[152]
As a result of the abuse of rights of the plaintiffs, defendant Quality Goods suffered reductions in sales and profit margins in the fiscal years 2000 and 2001 and the value of the shares held by the defendant Rosen in Quality Goods has been reduced by approximately $1,000,000.
[153]
No evidence was adduced to support such allegations. No financial statements or reports from an accountant were filed to substantiate a reduction in the value of the shares held by the defendant Rosen in Quality Goods. Therefore the counterclaim is dismissed.
CONCLUSIONS AND REMEDIES
[154]
I sum up my conclusions as follows:
1. Are the registered Hilfiger trademarks invalid? NO
2. Did the defendants infringe the plaintiffs' rights under s. 19 of the
Act
? NO
3. Did the defendants infringe the plaintiffs' rights under s. 20 of the
Act
? DEFENDANT PRODUITS DE QUALITÉ I.M.D. INC.: YES, FOR TMA 432,095
4. Was the defendants' use of his marks likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attaching to plaintiffs' trademarks contrary to s. 22 of the
Act
? NO
5. Was there passing-off of the defendants' wares as those of the plaintiffs in contravention of paragraph 7(b) of the
Act
? NO
6. Should the defendant Rosen be personally held liable/responsible for the wrongdoing, if any, of the defendant Quality Goods? NO
7. The parties agreed that the remaining questions such as permanent injunction under s. 20 of the
Act
; damages; accounting of profits; exemplary damages; pre- and post-judgment interest; order directing the defendant to deliver up to the plaintiffs all wares; costs; are to be settled by the Court by supplementary order, on the basis of an agreement between the parties, or, failing agreement, on the respective submissions of counsel.
JUDGMENT
[155]
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. The plaintiff's claim under s. 20 of the
Act
for TMA 432,095 against defendant, Produits de Qualité I.M.D. Inc. is allowed with costs. The remaining questions such as permanent injunction under s. 20 of the
Act
for damages, accounting of profits, exemplary damages, pre- and post-judgment interest, order directing the defendant to deliver up to the plaintiffs all wares, and costs are to be settled by the parties no later than February 7, 2005. Failing an agreement, the plaintiffs shall serve and file their written representations no later than February 18, 2005. The defendant, Produits de Qualité I.M.D. Inc. shall serve and file its submissions no later than March 4, 2005 and the plaintiffs shall reply, if they choose to do so, no later than March 11, 2005.
2. The action against defendant Harold Rosen is dismissed with costs. Costs are to be settled between the parties no later than February 7, 2005. Failing an agreement, the defendant, Harold Rosen shall serve and file his written representations no later than February 18, 2005. The plaintiffs shall serve and file their submissions no later than March 4, 2005 and the defendant, Harold Rosen shall reply, if he chooses to do so, no later than March 11, 2005;
3. The counterclaim of the defendant, Harold Rosen is dismissed. There is no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/gs
ANNEX 1
Sections 12 to 15 provide as follows:
"
REGISTRABLE TRADEMARKS
When trademark registrable
"12(1) Subject to section 13, a trademark is registrable if it is not
(a) a word that is primarily merely the name or the surname of an individual who is living or has died within the preceding thirty years;
(b) whether depicted, written or sounded, either clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive in the English or French language of the character or quality of the wares or services in association with which it is used or proposed to be used or of the conditions of or the persons employed in their production or of their place of origin;
(c) the name in any language of any of the wares or services in connection with which it is used or proposed to be used;
(d) confusing with a registered trademark;
(e) a mark of which the adoption is prohibited by section 9 or 10;
(f) a denomination the adoption of which is prohibited by section 10.1;
(g) in whole or in part a protected geographical indication, where the trademark is to be registered in association with a wine not originating in a territory indicated by the geographical indication; and
(h) in whole or in part a protected geographical indication, where the trademark is to be registered in association with a spirit not originating in a territory indicated by the geographical indication.
Idem
"(2) A trademark that is not registrable by reason of paragraph (1)(a) or (b) is registrable if it has been so used in Canada by the applicant or his predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the date of filing an application for its registration.
R.S., 1985, c. T-13, s. 12; 1990, c. 20, s. 81; 1993, c. 15, s. 59(F); 1994, c. 47, s. 193.
When distinguishing guises registrable
"13(1) A distinguishing guise is registrable only if
(a) it has been so used in Canada by the applicant or his predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the date of filing an application for its registration; and
(b) the exclusive use by the applicant of the distinguishing guise in association with the wares or services with which it has been used is not likely unreasonably to limit the development of any art or industry.
Effect of registration
"(2) No registration of a distinguishing guise interferes with the use of any utilitarian feature embodied in the distinguishing guise.
Not to limit art or industry
"(3) The registration of a distinguishing guise may be expunged by the Federal Court on the application of any interested person if the Court decides that the registration has become likely unreasonably to limit the development of any art or industry.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Notwithstanding section 12, a trademark that the applicant or the applicant's predecessor in title has caused to be duly registered in or for the country of origin of the applicant is registrable if, in Canada,
(a) it is not confusing with a registered trademark;
(b) it is not without distinctive character, having regard to all the circumstances of the case including the length of time during which it has been used in any country;
(c) it is not contrary to morality or public order or of such a nature as to deceive the public; or
(d) it is not a trademark of which the adoption is prohibited by section 9 or 10.
Trademarks regarded as registered abroad
"(2) A trademark that differs from the trademark registered in the country of origin only by elements that do not alter its distinctive character or affect its identity in the form under which it is registered in the country of origin shall be regarded for the purpose of subsection (1) as the trademark so registered.
R.S., 1985, c. T-13, s. 14; 1994, c. 47, s. 194.
Registration of confusing marks
"15(1) Notwithstanding section 12 or 14, confusing trademarks are registrable if the applicant is the owner of all such trademarks, which shall be known as associated trademarks.
Record
"(2) On the registration of any trademark associated with any other registered trademark, a note of the registration of each trademark shall be made on the record of registration of the other trademark.
Amendment
"(3) No amendment of the register recording any change in the ownership or in the name or address of the owner of any one of a group of associated trademarks shall be made unless the Registrar is satisfied that the same change has occurred with respect to all the trademarks in the group, and corresponding entries are made contemporaneously with respect to all those trademarks."
"
MARQUES DE COMMERCE ENREGISTRABLES
Marque de commerce enregistrable
"12(1) Sous réserve de l'article 13, une marque de commerce est enregistrable sauf dans l'un ou l'autre des cas suivants:
a) elle est constituée d'un mot n'étant principalement que le nom ou le nom de famille d'un particulier vivant ou qui est décédé dans les trente années précédentes;
b) qu'elle soit sous forme graphique, écrite ou sonore, elle donne une description claire ou donne une description fausse et trompeuse, en langue française ou anglaise, de la nature ou de la qualité des marchandises ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée, ou à l'égard desquels on projette de l'employer, ou des conditions de leur production, ou des personnes qui les produisent, ou du lieu d'origine de ces marchandises ou services;
c) elle est constituée du nom, dans une langue, de l'une des marchandises ou de l'un des services à l'égard desquels elle est employée, ou à l'égard desquels on projette de l'employer;
d) elle crée de la confusion avec une marque de commerce déposée;
e) elle est une marque dont l'article 9 ou 10 interdit l'adoption;
f) elle est une dénomination dont l'article 10.1 interdit l'adoption;
g) elle est constituée, en tout ou en partie, d'une indication géographique protégée et elle doit être enregistrée en liaison avec un vin dont le lieu d'origine ne se trouve pas sur le territoire visé par l'indication;
h) elle est constituée, en tout ou en partie, d'une indication géographique protégée et elle doit être enregistrée en liaison avec un spiritueux dont le lieu d'origine ne se trouve pas sur le territoire visé par l'indication.
Idem
"(2) Une marque de commerce qui n'est pas enregistrable en raison de l'alinéa (1)a) ou b) peut être enregistrée si elle a été employée au Canada par le requérant ou son prédécesseur en titre de façon à être devenue distinctive à la date de la production d'une demande d'enregistrement la concernant.
L.R. (1985), ch. T-13, art. 12; 1990, ch. 20, art. 81; 1993, ch. 15, art. 59(F); 1994, ch. 47, art. 193.
Signes distinctifs enregistrables
"13(1) Un signe distinctif n'est enregistrable que si, à la fois:
a) le signe a été employé au Canada par le requérant ou son prédécesseur en titre de façon à être devenu distinctif à la date de la production d'une demande d'enregistrement le concernant;
b) l'emploi exclusif, par le requérant, de ce signe distinctif en liaison avec les marchandises ou services avec lesquels il a été employé n'a pas vraisemblablement pour effet de restreindre de façon déraisonnable le développement d'un art ou d'une industrie.
Effet de l'enregistrement
"(2) Aucun enregistrement d'un signe distinctif ne gêne l'emploi de toute particularité utilitaire incorporée dans le signe distinctif.
Aucune restriction à l'art ou à l'industrie
"(3) L'enregistrement d'un signe distinctif peut être radié par la Cour fédérale, sur demande de toute personne intéressée, si le tribunal décide que l'enregistrement est vraisemblablement devenu de nature à restreindre d'une façon déraisonnable le développement d'un art ou d'une industrie.
S.R., ch. T-10, art. 13; S.R., ch. 10(2e suppl.), art. 64.
Enregistrement de marques déposées à l'étranger
"14(1) Nonobstant l'article 12, une marque de commerce que le requérant ou son prédécesseur en titre a fait dûment déposer dans son pays d'origine, ou pour son pays d'origine, est enregistrable si, au Canada, selon le cas:
a) elle ne crée pas de confusion avec une marque de commerce déposée;
b) elle n'est pas dépourvue de caractère distinctif, eu égard aux circonstances, y compris la durée de l'emploi qui en a été fait dans tout pays;
c) elle n'est pas contraire à la moralité ou à l'ordre public, ni de nature à tromper le public;
d) son adoption comme marque de commerce n'est pas interdite par l'article 9 ou 10.
Assimilation à marques déposées à l'étranger
"(2) Une marque de commerce qui diffère de la marque de commerce déposée dans le pays d'origine seulement par des éléments qui ne changent pas son caractère distinctif ou qui ne touchent pas à son identité dans la forme sous laquelle elle est déposée au pays d'origine, est considérée, pour l'application du paragraphe (1), comme la marque de commerce ainsi déposée.
L.R. (1985), ch. T-13, art. 14; 1994, ch. 47, art. 194.
Enregistrement de marques créant de la confusion
"15(1) Nonobstant l'article 12 ou 14, les marques de commerce créant de la confusion sont enregistrables si le requérant est le propriétaire de toutes ces marques, appelées 'marques de commerce liées'.
Inscription
"(2) Lors de l'enregistrement de toute marque de commerce liée à une autre marque de commerce déposée, une mention de l'enregistrement de chaque marque de commerce est faite dans l'inscription d'enregistrement de l'autre marque de commerce.
Modification
"(3) Aucune modification du registre consignant un changement dans la propriété ou le nom ou l'adresse du propriétaire de l'une d'un groupe de marques de commerce liées ne peut être apportée, à moins que le registraire ne soit convaincu que le même changement s'est produit à l'égard de toutes les marques de commerce de ce groupe, et que les inscriptions correspondantes sont faites à la même époque en ce qui regarde toutes ces marques de commerce."
[End of document]