[1]
Gibson, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Appeal Division (the "Tribunal") of the Immigration and Refugee Board wherein the Tribunal affirmed the refusal of the application for landing, sponsored by the applicant, of his father, mother and three brothers. The decision of the Tribunal was given from the "Bench" on the 29th day of July, 1993. The written reasons are dated the 3rd day of September, 1993.
[2]
The applicant received his Canadian immigrant visa at New Delhi on July 19, 1985. In affidavits executed by him in 1983 and 1984, related to his efforts to obtain a Canadian immigrant visa, he swore that he had a brother, Parbhjit Singh. At interviews conducted at New Delhi for the same purpose on June 6, 1983, and April 25, 1984, the applicant confirmed this information. Parbhjit Singh was not among the family members that the applicant undertook to sponsor.
[3]
Counsel for the applicant at the time he undertook to sponsor his parents and three brothers advised Employment and Immigration Canada that Parbhjit Singh is, in fact, not a brother of the applicant but only a relative living in the same village. This information led officials of Employment and Immigration Canada to question whether Parbhjit Singh was in fact a real brother of the applicant who, for some reason, was inadmissible to Canada. If this were the case, Employment and Immigration Canada would be required to refuse the sponsored applications of the applicant's parents and perhaps his brothers.
[4]
The applicant testified before the Tribunal that Parbhjit Singh is not his brother and is in no way related to him. The applicant's testimony was to the effect that Parbhjit Singh does not even live in the applicant's village in India. The applicant's explanation for this conflict between his sworn testimony and his affidavits was that the go-between in arranging his marriage to the women who sponsored his coming to Canada "... made it a condition of the finalization of the relationship between the (applicant) and his current spouse that he promise to list Parbhjit Singh as his brother, with the intention that after the (applicant's) immigration to Canada, he (the applicant) would turn around and sponsor his family and include Parbhjit Singh as an accompanying dependant of his parents [see footnote 1].
[5]
In its reasons, the Tribunal states:
"The explanation provided to Canada Immigration by the appellant's (applicant's) former counsel is not consistent with the information provided to me by the appellant (applicant) under oath. I have no explanation provided to me, as to why Mr. Mangat (applicant's former counsel) would make up this story. Mr. Mangat has not been called as a witness and no one else has been called to explain the discrepancy in this evidence.
"I also have other evidence from the appellant (applicant) that he never told his parents about the condition imposed on his relationship with his current spouse by Charam Kaur (the person who arranged his marriage). It is strange to understand why his parents would not have been told just before their assessment by the visa officer overseas so that the visa officer could have investigated this story. It would also have been helpful if I had some corroborative evidence of the explanation provided by the appellant (applicant). There is nothing before me from Charam Kaur as to this so-called arrangement. The appellant (applicant) appears to know Charam Kaur's whereabouts. She lives in the United Kingdom. He knows that she was the go-between and according to the appellant's (applicant's) testimony, she was the grandmother of Parbhjit Singh.
"I have considerable documentary evidence as to the composition of the appellant's family. I have documentary evidence produced by the family themselves. There is a voter's list. There are ration cards. I have a certificate from the police. Counsel for the appellant (applicant) relies very heavily on this document to vouch for the truth of the family composition in this case.
"However, in my view, the bottom line is that I have to have some credible and trustworthy explanation from the appellant (applicant) as to the reason why the affidavits produced in 1983 and '84 were not the truth. That has not been forthcoming from him."
[6]
The Tribunal then goes on to reject the evidence of a Sarpanch who testified on behalf of the applicant as to the applicant's family's composition.
[7]
Having thus analyzed the evidence that was before it, the Tribunal went on to uphold the visa officer's decision.
[8]
Counsel for the applicant argued before me that the Tribunal based its decision on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard to the material before it and further, that the Tribunal failed to observe a principle of procedural fairness that it was required by law to observe.
[9]
On the first issue, counsel acknowledged that, while it was open to the Tribunal to analyze and weigh the evidence before it, including the documentary evidence that is referred to in the portion of the reasons for decision that is quoted above, it erred in failing to take into account or acknowledge a sworn statement provided by the applicant's father attesting as to who his children are and, by implication, to the fact that Parbhjit Singh is not one of his children and therefore not a brother of the claimant [see footnote 2]. This document is directly relevant to the issue of identity of the applicant's family members and confirms that, whichever of the two post 1984 stories might be the correct one, if, indeed either could be said to be correct, Parbhjit Singh is not a member of that family. Since the membership of the applicant's family was the central issue before the visa officer and then the Appeal Division, it is hard to understand that the Tribunal would refer to relevant case-specific documentary evidence and assess it, albeit summarily, and not make reference to this document and assess it in turn.
[10]
It is trite to say that a Tribunal is not obliged to refer in its reasons for decision to all of the evidence that was before it. The fact that a Tribunal fails to do so does not, in ordinary circumstances give rise to a conclusion that the Tribunal has failed to take into account all of the evidence that is before it. But I conclude that that principle does not apply to a failure to make reference to a case-specific document that is evidence directly relevant to the central issue addressed in the Tribunal's decision. That was the situation here. In failing to acknowledge the sworn declaration of the applicant's father as to the membership of his family, I conclude that the Tribunal erred in law or based its decision on an erroneous finding of fact that it made without regard for all of the material before it [see footnote 3].
[11]
As indicated above, the second issue argued on behalf of the applicant related to the duty to act fairly. Both the visa officer and the Tribunal failed to draw to the attention of the applicant and his family a rather obscure transitional provision of the Immigration Regulations that might have enabled them to overcome the difficulties that they faced. If the visa officer failed to fulfil a duty of fairness, which might well have been the case, that matter is not before me, only the decision of the Tribunal. The applicant was before the Tribunal. He was represented. It is not clear whether his representative was a qualified barrister and solicitor. Nonetheless, I fail to see that there was any duty on the Tribunal to provide advice to the applicant as to how he might more effectively sponsor his parents and brothers. The matter before the Tribunal was the reconsideration of the decision of the visa officer. It was not how the applicant might achieve his desired result.
[12]
Based then on my analysis regarding the first ground argued on behalf of the applicant, I allowed this application, set aside the decision of the Tribunal and referred this matter back for rehearing and reconsideration by a differently constituted Tribunal.
[13]
Neither counsel recommended that a question be certified. No question is certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/gas
Footnotes
1. Page 3 of the reasons for decision of the Tribunal, page 82 of the applicant's record.
2. Tribunal Record page 57.
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). Though not on all fours, in that decision, I expressed some concern about failure to acknowledge case specific documentary material.
[End of document]