 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 1205)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Russell, J.
November 29, 2013.
Counsel:
Robert Blanshay, for the applicant;
Aleksandra Lipska, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Blanshay & Lewis, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
INTRODUCTION
[1]
Russell, J.
: This is an application under subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [Act] for judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dated 28 August 2012 [Decision], which refused the Applicant's application to be deemed a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection under sections 96 and 97 of the Act.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The Applicant is a citizen of Pakistan who came to Canada in April 2010 on a student visa. He studied in Toronto briefly from May to July 2010 before ending his studies due to stress, and filed a refugee claim in November 2010. His claim was heard by the RPD on 23 August 2012 with the aid of an Urdu-English interpreter, and was refused five days later on 28 August 2012, as the RPD did not find his claim to be credible.
[3]
The Applicant claims to have suffered threats and violence from an extremist religious organization  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Sepah-E-Sehaba (SSP), after he became romantically involved with the daughter of one of the organization's leaders, named Faiza. He says that his life will be in danger if he is returned to Pakistan.
[4]
The Applicant says he was not viewed as an acceptable suitor for Faiza because of religious differences, but was in love and did not wish to end the relationship. After Faiza told her mother of their relationship, they were both subjected to threats and violence, as was the Applicant's family. He claims that Faiza was badly beaten by her father on 8 July 2009 and again in late September 2009, suffering a broken leg on the second occasion. On 15 July 2009, the Applicant says gunmen shot at him and his father while they were returning from morning prayers, killing his father on the spot. Members of the SSP allegedly beat him and threatened his life on 12 February 2010, after which he went into hiding until he obtained a student visa and fled to Canada in April 2010. Finally, in November 2010, after the Applicant was already in Canada, he claims his family's home was shot at and set on fire by members of the SSP who came there looking for him. He claims that the SSP continues to threaten him because Faiza refuses to marry someone else of her father's choosing. He says SSP members came to his family's home to threaten him in February 2011, and that Faiza advised him when they last spoke, in July 2012, that he was still in danger from the SSP.
[5]
The Applicant also claims that he was brutally beaten by members of his own extended family, after refusing to marry a cousin to whom he had become betrothed against his will in December 2008 at the insistence of the family's elders. After the Applicant broke off this betrothal due to his relationship with Faiza, his cousin's father, brothers, and their friends beat him in May 2009 because of the embarrassment he had caused them. He claims that his uncle continues to make threats against his life through his mother, most recently in March 2012.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[6]
The RPD stated that credibility was the determinative issue in refusing the Applicant's refugee claim, and pointed to a number of purported inconsistencies and weaknesses in the Applicant's evidence. The RPD found that, on a balance of probabilities, the Applicant did not have the problems he described at the hands of his relatives, Faiza's relatives and the SSP.
[7]
The RPD observed that the narrative portion of the Applicant's Personal Information Form [PIF] states that the gunmen "chased" him on the morning of 15 July 2009 when his father was killed. However, he testified at the hearing that the men stepped out of a car suddenly and started shooting, that his father was shot and fell on him, and that he remained there with his father lying on him while the men ran away. The RPD found that, based on the Applicant's testimony,"there was no chasing involved because the claimant stayed where he was, with his father on him." The RPD did not accept the Applicant's explanation that the men "came from behind." The police report of the incident raised a similar inconsistency because it stated that the Applicant "saved his life by running." The RPD rejected the Applicant's explanation that he was disoriented when his father fell on him, and "pushed him away and wove a little bit and then ... fell on myself." The RPD found that "moving a little bit is not tantamount to running away." The RPD found that the Applicant had provided inconsistent evidence about these significant events and had failed to provide reasonable explanations when asked about it. This detracted from his credibility.
[8]
The RPD also found that the Applicant provided inconsistent evidence regarding the number of times he sought police assistance  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In his PIF narrative, the Applicant mentioned seeking police help on 10 May 2009 and 13 February 2009, but made no mention of seeking police help on 15 July 2009 - the day his father was killed. At the hearing, the Applicant testified that he sought police help three times, including on 15 July 2009. The RPD rejected the Applicant's explanation that he did not mention in his PIF personally seeking police help on this occasion because he had stated in the PIF that his "uncle had gone to the police". Noting that the inability or unwillingness of police to protect him was an important part of his refugee claim, and that the PIF instructs applicants to detail efforts to seek state protection and the result, the RPD found that this was a "material omission" that undermined the Applicant's credibility.
[9]
The RPD also observed an inconsistency as to whom the police report, or "FIR" (meaning First Information Report or First Investigation Report), was filed against on 15 July 2009. The Applicant's PIF stated that his uncle filed a FIR "against [the] SSP," when in fact the FIR was filed against "unknown persons." The RPD rejected the Applicant's explanation at the hearing that his uncle "had filed a report for unknown people but I knew that it was their doing."
[10]
The RPD observed an inconsistency in the evidence regarding when Faiza's leg was broken. While an affidavit from one of Faiza's friends stated that this occurred in July 2009, the Applicant testified that it occurred in late September 2009. The RPD noted that the Applicant disclosed the friend's affidavit on his own initiative, and "it does not make sense why his oral and written evidence are not consistent with respect to this incident."
[11]
The RPD observed an inconsistency in the evidence regarding who was present when the Applicant's father was shot. While the PIF stated that the Applicant and his stepfather went out for a walk that morning, his testimony at the hearing was that he, his father and his uncle were together. The RPD rejected the Applicant's explanation that "my uncle was coming behind us because he is a little bit obese so he walks slowly." The RPD observed that "[i]f the panel were to accept [this] explanation, then it would mean that people are only considered as having gone for a walk together if they walk side by side".
[12]
The RPD observed an inconsistency in the evidence regarding how Faiza's parents came to know of her relationship with the Applicant. The PIF narrative states that the Applicant "many time (sic) encouraged Faiza to inform her parents about her love affair but she was scared because of [the] stubbornness of her father." It continues, "[b]y one way or the other it came to her father's knowledge that she was in love with me." At the hearing, the Applicant testified that Faiza told her mother about the relationship at his insistence, and that her mother then told her father. When asked about this apparent inconsistency, the Applicant simply responded that Faiza informed her mother at his insistence and because she was close to her mother, and that her mother said that she would talk to her father.
[13]
The RPD observed an inconsistency regarding the number of times the Applicant left his place of hiding after allegedly being beaten by SSP members in February 2010. The Applicant testified that he went into hiding at a friend's uncle's home in Defence, approximately one hour's drive away from the site of the alleged beating, later that same day, after receiving medical treatment. Later in the hearing, when asked if he ever left his friend's uncle's home in Defence until he left Pakistan on April 27, 2010, he replied that he only left to go to the postal courier to apply for and receive his Canadian study permit. Yet he had testified earlier that he made a report to police back in the district where the attack allegedly occurred, the day after its occurrence. The RPD found this to be contradictory, and rejected the Applicant's explanation that his friend took him back the next morning to file the police report, and that "it was the same day while I was moving in ... ." The RPD found that this amounted to shifting testimony regarding whether he left his friend's uncle's house to go to the police.
[14]
The RPD observed an inconsistency arising from the Applicant's failure to note in his PIF narrative that police told him, following the alleged beating in February 2010, that they had orders from their superiors not to file FIRs against the SSP. He testified at the hearing that the police refused to file a FIR "[b]ecause they said I did not have any evidence ... [a]nd they said they have orders from above to ... not to write ... FIR's against this organization." The PIF states that the "police officer made excuses not to write a FIR against the SSP,"with a hand-written amendment reading "because I did not have evidence." The RPD found that the unwillingness of the state to provide protection is a significant part of a refugee claim, and the failure to mention a refusal of the police to issue a FIR because they have orders to that effect was a material omission that detracted from the Applicant's credibility.
[15]
The RPD observed an inconsistency regarding the events of 11 November 2010, when the Applicant's family home  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was allegedly burned. The PIF states only that "fanatics of the SSP came, tried to find my whereabouts and fired shots at my house in order to kill me." It does not mention a fire. The RPD rejected the Applicant's explanation that his English language skills were poor and he intended to state both that shots were fired and the house was set on fire. The RPD noted that the Applicant was assisted by counsel, that it was open to him to complete his PIF narrative with the assistance of an interpreter, and that he had declared in writing at the start of the hearing that the PIF was "complete, true and correct."
[16]
With respect to this same incident, the RPD noted that a newspaper report of the fire submitted by the Applicant made no mention of the SSP, and rejected the Applicant's explanation that this was because "common people do not know who they are."
[17]
The RPD observed an inconsistency in the Applicant's testimony regarding whether he knew anyone else who had been threatened by the SSP. When initially asked, the Applicant testified that he had seen reports of such threats in the news media, but did not know anyone personally who had been threatened. However, an affidavit from a friend of the Applicant states that he was personally threatened by the SSP because of the assistance he provided to the Applicant. The RPD found that the Applicant did not provide an adequate response when asked about this inconsistency, stating only that he "thought [the Member] had asked a general question."
[18]
The RPD also raised concerns about the authenticity of several documents submitted by the Applicant in support of his claim. The RPD cited objective evidence that fraudulent documents are prevalent  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (National Documentation Package for Pakistan (June 4, 2012), item 3.3). While acknowledging that this does not mean that the Applicant's documents are false, the RPD stated that it does justify some scrutiny, and noted concerns about the authenticity of several documents submitted as evidence, including: affidavits allegedly sworn by persons  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; the death certificate and accompanying post-mortem report regarding the Applicant's father's death; medical notes relating to the Applicant's treatment after the alleged beatings; and medical notes regarding the treatment of his mother and sister following the alleged attack on the family home in November 2010. With respect to the medical notes and reports, the RPD also observed that they did not identify who had caused the injuries or in what circumstances. The RPD therefore assigned "no weight" to each of these documents in terms of establishing the Applicant's allegations. With respect to the newspaper articles submitted by the Applicant regarding the death of his father and the fire at his family home, the RPD noted "significant irregularities on the face of these newspapers," including misaligned and overlapping text and pictures, and that the Applicant was unable to provide an explanation. While not making an explicit finding that the articles were fraudulent, the RPD quoted this Court's observation that "[t]he Board should not be treated as a training school in which counterfeiters can practice their craft" (quoting
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]), and assigned no weight to these documents.
[19]
The RPD further found that the Applicant's behaviour in waiting four months after ceasing his studies before applying for refugee status was inconsistent with the subjective fear he claimed to have for his life and safety. The RPD observed that someone who is truly fearful can be expected to claim refugee status at the first opportunity. The Applicant's explanation that he thought things would improve for him and he could return to Pakistan was not reasonable in light of the seriousness of what he alleges took place  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[20]
Based on these cumulative credibility concerns, the RPD found that there was not a serious possibility that the Applicant would be persecuted  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , or that he would be subjected to a risk to his life, a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, or a danger of torture.
ISSUE
[21]
The issue raised in this Application is whether the RPD's Decision was unreasonable, taking into account the RPD's credibility findings, treatment of the documentary evidence, and findings on the issue of subjective fear.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[22]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] held that a standard of review analysis need not be conducted in every instance. Instead, where the standard of review applicable to a particular question before the court is settled in a satisfactory manner by past jurisprudence, the reviewing court may adopt that standard of review. Only where this search proves fruitless, or where the relevant precedents appear to be inconsistent with new developments in the common law principles of judicial review, must the reviewing court undertake a consideration of the four factors comprising the standard of review analysis:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[23]
The parties agree that the appropriate standard for reviewing the RPD's decision in this case is reasonableness. I agree.
[24]
When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the analysis will be concerned with "the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process [and also with] whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law." See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 47, and
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Put another way, the Court should intervene only if the Decision was unreasonable in the sense that it falls outside the"range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law."
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
[25]
The following provisions of the Act are applicable in these proceedings:
Convention refugee
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a)
is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b)
not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in need of protection
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a)
to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b)
to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
Définition de « réfugié »
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a)
soit se trouve hors de tout pays don't elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b)
soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays don't elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a)
soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b)
soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
ARGUMENTS
Applicant
[26]
The Applicant argues that the RPD's Decision was unreasonable. He says that the RPD was over-zealous in finding that the Applicant's refugee claim lacked credibility, and conducted both a microscopic examination of the allegations supporting his claim and an equally microscopic comparison of his oral testimony and his PIF narrative, despite the fact that this Court has cautioned against such an approach:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The RPD unreasonably rejected all of the documents submitted in support of the application based on pure speculation, without any evidentiary basis to question their authenticity. In addition, the RPD raised the issue of the Applicant's delay in claiming asylum in Canada despite dealing with this issue only "curtly" during the hearing, and despite the Applicant's reasonable and plausible explanation for the delay.
[27]
The Applicant argues that his claim was based squarely on the issue of religious beliefs, honour, and culture  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as it relates to romantic relationships, and that the RPD failed to be alert to cultural differences affecting "how things operate  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , versus Canada." Evidence and allegations that may seem thoroughly implausible and non-credible in the Canadian context may be quite plausible and credible in the context of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[28]
In addition, the RPD unreasonably failed to take note of and give proper weight to factors that were supportive of the Applicant's credibility:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Aguilar Zacarias
]. The Court has stated that positive credibility findings are possible even where there are evidentiary inconsistencies, omissions and contradictions; otherwise, there would be little need for an oral hearing:
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Here, the Applicant testified in a forthright and spontaneous manner, exhibited the emotional demeanour and comportment of someone testifying to actual events, including his highly emotional state when testifying about his father's death, and marshalled supporting documentary evidence in support of most, if not all, of his key allegations.
[29]
Applicants are presumed to be telling the truth, and a failure to provide corroborating documents on a particular point cannot be used to impugn an applicant's credibility in the absence of evidence to contradict the allegations:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Applicant argues that the RPD's focus on his failure to provide documentation suggests that it improperly used the absence of corroborating documents to impugn his credibility.
[30]
Nor can the credibility of documents themselves be rejected without a good reason for doing so. Documents that are "official in capacity" are considered to be genuine unless there is a clear evidentiary basis to impugn their credibility:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Here, the RPD impugned the credibility of police reports, medical reports and supporting affidavits without any evidentiary basis for doing so. The RPD's observation that the affidavits lacked "security features" and that there was no way to assess their origins was sheer speculation. Furthermore, the RPD's reliance on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, to support its findings about fraudulent documents is misplaced and unreasonable. In that case, the refugee claimant's documents were sent out to CBSA officials for analysis and verification, and the analysis showed they had been chemically washed, altered, and cut and pasted, including the insertion of new photographs and signatures. Here, by contrast, the RPD strayed far from the evidence before it and engaged in speculation, unfairly raising credibility and plausibility concerns that were simply not valid:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[31]
The Applicant submits that the discrepancies noted by the RPD do not amount to real or material inconsistencies. With respect to the manner in which Faiza's father learned of their relationship, while the statement that he learned by "one way or the other" is a bit vague, the point of the hearing is to permit the Applicant to expand on key written allegations and be confronted with questions and issues in greater detail. The crux of the allegation - the relationship, Faiza's parents' knowledge and the subsequent threats and attacks - was included in the PIF and told by the Applicant in the hearing.
[32]
With respect to the Applicant's account of the morning his father was killed, even leaving aside the reasonable and plausible explanation that the English word "chase" may correspond to a number of Urdu words and phrases, the description is accurate even when the English term is considered. Few could disagree that the experience of walking home only to be approached by a car and then shot at from behind could correspond to a feeling of being chased.
[33]
The Applicant argues that the RPD's focus on a PIF omission regarding the Applicant's efforts to seek police protection is perverse. The events of 15 July 2009 were described in the PIF, and the original police report (or FIR) describing the incident in detail was disclosed. The Applicant stated in the PIF that it was his uncle who reported the incident to police, and the FIR confirms this. While it was an omission not to state that he personally sought police protection on this occasion, it was not a material omission:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  IMM-4394-10 (per Justice Crampton, as he then was);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  omission will be determinative of credibility; rather, the nature of the omission and the context in which the new information is brought forward must be examined:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD). The totality of the evidence provided to the RPD disclosed the full picture of what occurred, and it was perverse and unreasonable to base a negative credibility finding on this omission.
[34]
The RPD's negative credibility findings based on other supposed discrepancies in the Applicant's evidence were equally unreasonable. The Applicant reasonably explained that his uncle was trailing behind him and his father on the morning his father was shot because he is obese. He also reasonably explained that while he did not state in the PIF that the police told him in February 2010 that they had orders not to file FIR's against the SSP, he did state that they refused to file one.
[35]
The Applicant argues that he cannot reasonably be expected to resolve purported inconsistencies that result from the actions or mistaken recollections of others. While the FIR filed on 15 July 2009 did not specifically mention the SSP, the Applicant did not file the complaint, and his uncle was not present in the hearing room to testify as to what he told police. The RPD cannot expect the Applicant to explain how and why the FIR was drafted in the manner it was or why certain wording was used:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD). The same applies with respect to a third-party affiant's testimony that Faiza's leg was broken in July 2009, while the Applicant recalls that this occurred in late September 2009.
[36]
The Applicant further argues that a delay in claiming asylum is not, in itself, indicative of a lack of subjective fear or a lack of credibility in the claim, and that a claimant has to be given an opportunity to offer an explanation for the delay:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD). Here, the Applicant was asked one question about the delay, and provided a reasonable explanation: he hoped that things might improve for him  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and that he could simply go home. In the meantime, he had a valid student visa and there was no evidence the Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA) would quickly learn of his cessation of studies and issue a removal order.
[37]
Based on these alleged errors in the RPD's reasoning, the Applicant argues that the RPD failed in its duty to provide reasons embedded in transparency, intelligibility and justification (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), and that nothing in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Newfoundland Nurses
] removes that obligation.
Respondent
[38]
The Respondent argues that the Applicant's claim was reasonably dismissed due to a lack of credibility: he omitted, and was inconsistent on, numerous important facts in his oral and written testimony. His documentary evidence did not establish his allegations, and in fact contradicted his own testimony at times.
[39]
The Respondent notes that credibility determinations are within the RPD's expertise. The RPD had the benefit of observing the Applicant directly, and was thus in the best position to assess the credibility or plausibility of his account. It is not for this Court to substitute its findings on credibility for those of the RPD, even if it might have reached a different conclusion:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), and the presumption that an applicant's sworn testimony is true can be rebutted if there is reason to doubt his or her truthfulness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above. Here, there were reasons to doubt the Applicant's truthfulness, and the RPD set out its credibility findings in clear and unmistakable terms, based on numerous inconsistencies between his oral testimony and his documentary evidence. While the Applicant argues that other conclusions might have been possible on the facts, the existence of an alternative interpretation of the evidence does not, in itself, indicate reviewable error:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
Ma
].
[40]
The Applicant's highly emotional state when testifying about his father's death does not assist in establishing his credibility. On the contrary, while it is appropriate to consider "demeanour" in the sense of hesitation or uncertainty in responding to questions, and to draw negative inferences when a witness has difficulty giving adequate and direct answers, overly subjective conclusions based on posture or perceived attitude "are not within the appropriate purview of a credibility assessment":
Aguilar  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 24.
[41]
The RPD's credibility findings went to the heart of the Applicant's claim. For example, the RPD reasonably found that the Applicant was not consistent in describing the shooting of his father, which was a critical event. There is a considerable difference between running away (i.e. being "chased") and lying on the ground unconscious underneath another body. The RPD also reasonably rejected the Applicant's explanation for failing to state in his PIF narrative that his uncle was present during this important event: it made no sense that three family members leaving morning prayers would not be considered to be going for a walk together simply because one of them was walking slower than the other two.
[42]
The RPD's credibility findings based on other omissions from the PIF and inconsistencies between the PIF and the Applicant's oral testimony were also reasonable, especially considering that section 31 of the PIF directs claimants to "set out in chronological order all the significant events and reasons that have led you to claim refugee protection in Canada." The omission of the alleged burning of the family home, the omission of a reference to seeking police help on 15 July 2009, and the inconsistency regarding how Faiza's parents came to know of the relationship all reasonably support negative inferences about the Applicant's credibility. The same is true of the inconsistency regarding when and where the Applicant reported the alleged February 2010 beating to police, and the omission from the PIF of any reference to the fact that, on that occasion, police refused to file a report against the SSP because they had orders from their superiors to that effect. Viewed in context, it made no sense that the Applicant would omit the latter fact from his PIF.
[43]
The Respondent reminds the Court that contradictions are not the sole basis upon which the RPD may draw a negative credibility inference; the failure to initially put forward critical information underpinning a claim for protection can also support a negative inference. The RPD is entitled to consider whether a claimant is embellishing or adding significant facts in order to bolster their alleged fear of persecution:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Furthermore, there is generally no obligation on the RPD to signal its conclusions on the general credibility of the evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[44]
Contrary to the Applicant's contention that the RPD made hasty findings that documents were fraudulent, the RPD gave them appropriate scrutiny, noted their lack of security features along with the inconsistencies in the Applicant's evidence and, based on the totality of this evidence, reasonably assigned the documents in question no weight in establishing the Applicant's claim. In support of the RPD's finding on the newspaper articles, the Respondent notes that the article about the Applicant's father's death uses almost the exact same wording as the police report of the event:
Newfoundland  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at para 16.
[45]
In response to the contention that the RPD could have requested authentication of documents, the Respondent argues that the onus is on the Applicant to present credible evidence in support of his claim:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[46]
The RPD's finding that the Applicant's delay in making a refugee claim indicated an absence of subjective fear was also reasonable, the Respondent argues. Delay in claiming refugee status is an important factor which the RPD is entitled to consider:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA). It points to a lack of subjective fear of persecution, based on the rationale that someone who was truly fearful would claim refugee status at the first opportunity:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Given the severity of the events the Applicant alleges, and the inherent insecurity of his status in Canada (given that his visa required him to attend school full-time), it was reasonable for the RPD to find that the Applicant should have made his claim at the first opportunity, and to reject his explanation for not doing so. The argument that the finding is in error because the Applicant was asked only one question on this point is groundless, as the Applicant has cited no authority requiring a minimum number of questions before the RPD can feel satisfied that it can make a finding on an issue.
ANALYSIS
[47]
This is the kind of decision that regularly comes up for review, in which a series of "cumulative credibility problems" taken together lead the RPD to conclude that a refugee claimant does not face the alleged risks that underpin the claim for protection.
[48]
As is usual in such cases, the Applicant alleges that the Decision is unreasonable because the RPD conducted a microscopic examination of the evidence, rejected reasonable explanations for inconsistencies in the evidence, made speculative findings without an evidentiary basis, was not alive to the relevant cultural context, and ignored the full range of the evidence that the Applicant marshalled to support the basic tenets of his claim.
[49]
The Applicant says that his evidence provided a consistent account of his "substantive allegations" that was supported by a wealth of documentary material that was ignored by the RPD when it proceeded to pick apart "specific wording used in oral and written evidence."
[50]
In this kind of application the Court is obliged to review each finding in turn in an equally microscopic way with a view to determining whether there is sufficient error to warrant a finding of unreasonableness. Much of this is an invitation for the Court to recast and reweigh evidence in a way that produces a favourable outcome for the Applicant.
[51]
Before embarking upon such an exercise, a number of well-established principles and caveats have to be kept in mind.
[52]
First of all, the RPD is in the best position to assess credibility and is entitled to significant deference from the Court in this regard. The Court cannot simply substitute its credibility assessment for that of the RPD even if it might have reached a different conclusion. See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above.
[53]
The Court also has to bear in mind that other reasonable conclusions might have been possible on the facts, but this does not, in itself, render the RPD's Decision unreasonable. See, for example,
Ma
, above, at para 28.
[54]
Less deference is due in relation to plausibility findings, but even there, the RPD can make reasonable findings based upon implausibilities, common sense, and rationality, and may reject evidence that is not consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole. See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, para 4.
[55]
In the present case, the RPD had numerous credibility concerns that arose from inconsistencies between the Applicant's oral testimony, his PIF and his documentary evidence that went to central aspects of his claim. In this review application, the Applicant is asking the Court to review all of the RPD's findings in turn and, in effect, to reassess his evidence as a whole in its cultural context and find that the RPD reached unreasonable conclusions on each point.
[56]
I have reviewed each point in turn and, for the most part, I think I have to conclude that, although it is possible to disagree with the RPD's findings, it is not possible to say that they fall outside of the range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law. The approach of the RPD in this case is the usual one of comparing oral testimony with the PIF narrative and with the other available evidence and documentation, in order to determine whether inconsistencies exist, and then giving the Applicant an opportunity to explain those inconsistencies. This approach to testing credibility has been endorsed by the Court on numerous occasions, and I find nothing in the RPD's reasoning in this instance that indicates a lack of attention or sensitivity to cultural context or conditions in the Applicant's country of origin.
[57]
There were important, material inconsistencies in relation to the following:
(a) The Applicant's oral account of the attack on himself and his father by the SSP was not consistent with the PIF narrative and the police report submitted as evidence. The Applicant could not adequately explain these discrepancies and the RPD was not unreasonable in rejecting his explanations;
(b) The Applicant could not adequately explain why his oral allegation that the SSP had set his house on fire had not been included in his PIF narrative. The Applicant's failure to set out this important allegation in his PIF narrative, which is supposed to contain "all significant events and reasons" that have led to the claim, gave rise to credibility concerns in the same way that important omissions from the PIF have done on numerous other occasions that have come before this Court;
(c) There was an obvious inconsistency between the Applicant saying in his PIF that Faiza's parents found out about the relationship "one way or another" and the Applicant's later oral assertion that he had pressured Faiza to tell her mother, who subsequently told her father. This was not reasonably explained;
(d) The Applicant was also inconsistent about the number of times he sought police help and his explanation was, reasonably, rejected.
[58]
The RPD also identified and raised numerous other issues with the Applicant which he could not explain to the RPD's satisfaction. It is not necessary for me to mention every individual instance here because my review of the Decision, the transcript and the record reveals that, although other conclusions may have been reasonably drawn, I cannot say that the RPD's findings, either individually or cumulatively, fall outside of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> range. It is possible to disagree with the RPD over these matters, but the jurisprudence is clear that unless the Court can find that the RPD's findings on credibility fall outside of the range of possible, acceptable outcomes that are defensible in respect of the facts and law, the Court cannot interfere with the Decision, even if the Court disagrees and would have found otherwise. This is what deference means. I may have given the Applicant the benefit of the doubt on each point of concern, but this does not mean that the RPD was unreasonable to fault him and, in the end, find his allegations lacked credibility. It is particularly important to bear in mind in this type of case that the Court has had no opportunity to observe the Applicant giving evidence.
[59]
I will, however, refer to one illustrative example that demonstrates a general problem with the Applicant's approach to this review. The Applicant submitted to the RPD an affidavit sworn by a childhood friend of Faiza that contradicted his own evidence as to when Faiza's leg was allegedly broken. The Applicant had said it was in September but the friend said Faiza's leg was already broken in July. When asked for an explanation as to this discrepancy, the Applicant merely insisted that Faiza's leg was not broken in July. The RPD refers to this discrepancy in the Decision:
[22] The claimant testified that Faiza's father beat her and broke her leg at the end of September 2009 because of her relationship with the claimant and her refusal to marry someone else. He testified that he saw her broken leg when he met with her on October 4, 2009 and he could see the cast and the marks on her broken leg. He further testified that Faiza informed him that her father broke her leg and that she had never had a broken leg before.
[23] In support of his allegations, the claimant disclosed an affidavit from Faiza's childhood friend. According to this affidavit, when she visited Faiza in July 2009, she had injuries as a result of her father's physical violence and, in particular, a broken leg. When the panel noted that this affidavit provides that Faiza's father broke her leg in
July
whereas his testimony provides that Faiza broke it in
September
, the claimant replied that she did not have a broken leg in July. The panel is not satisfied by his explanation. The claimant disclosed this affidavit on his own initiative. It does not make sense why his oral and written evidence are not consistent with respect to this incident. His inconsistent evidence in this regard detracts from his credibility.
[60]
This is simply one instance of a discrepancy that is not explained and, in my view, it is fairly minor. Taken alone, it would hardly be sufficient to reject the Applicant's refugee claim on the basis of lack of credibility. However, the claim is rejected on the basis of "cumulative credibility problems" and the discrepancy as to when Faiza's leg was broken is one of a long line of such problems. The friend's affidavit, as the RPD points out, is part of the Applicant's own evidence. He must have known of this discrepancy. If there was an explanation, it was up to the Applicant to find out why the friend had said July and explain this to the RPD. Instead, he chose to submit evidence that did not support his other evidence that the father broke Faiza's leg at the end of September. This was the Applicant's choice. He now asks the Court to find that the RPD was unreasonable in its approach to this piece of evidence and in its approach to the cumulative problems it found in his evidence as a whole. He says that the RPD was overly microscopic and culturally insensitive. But timing issues are always examined in refugee claims, and there are no cultural implications to explain a difference between July and September with respect to when someone's leg was broken.
[61]
I do accept that the RPD goes somewhat too far with some of its findings. For example, in looking at subjective fear and the Applicant's delay in making his refugee claim, the RPD says,
inter alia
, that
The panel recognizes that the claimant was in possession of a study permit. However, the claimant stopped attending school in Canada in July 2010 and part of his permit requisite is to attend school full-time. Therefore, the claimant would no longer have been in conformity with the requirement of his study permit and may have been deported at any time.
(Decision at para 40)
[62]
There was no evidence to support this conclusion and, even if there was, there was no evidence that the Applicant knew he could be deported at any time. The issue was not put to him. So the RPD is, at this point in the Decision, being speculative and unreasonable. However, this is only a small part of the RPD's subjective fear finding and when this finding is read in full, the reference to a knowledge of deportation is not really material:
[41] The panel asked the claimant why he failed to make his refugee claim earlier. He stated that he thought things would improve for him. This is not a reasonable explanation because the claimant says that he was fearful  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for one year prior to his departure and that his father was killed. His explanation that things would improve over a matter of a few months is not reasonable given the seriousness of what he alleges took place. Someone who is truly fearful can reasonably be expected to claim refugee status at the first opportunity. When a person risks being removed to a country where his life is at risk, one reasonably expects, regardless of any possible processes that may be available, that the person will tell the authorities that he faces danger in his country if he were to go back. In this case, the claimant waited about four months after having stopped school before seeking Canada's protection. His actions in this regard are inconsistent with his fear.
[63]
The Applicant takes issue with this conclusion, but delay in making a claim is a regularly invoked factor in a subjective fear finding of which the Applicant, represented by experienced counsel, was fully aware.
[64]
In any event, the lack of subjective fear is not the determinative basis for this Decision. As the RPD makes clear at paragraph 8 of the Decision, "The determinative issue in regard to this claim is credibility." The Applicant's delay in making his claim is just one more factor that does not support the core aspects of his claim. The jurisprudence of this Court accepts the rationale that it is not unreasonable for the RPD to conclude that someone who is truly fearful would claim refugee status at the first opportunity. Given the severity of the events that the Applicant alleged led up to his claim, it was not unreasonable for the RPD to conclude that his "actions in this regard are inconsistent with his fear."
[65]
Generally speaking, I cannot find an error by the RPD that is material enough to render the Decision unreasonable.
[66]
Counsel agree there is no question for certification and the Court concurs.
JUDGMENT
[67]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application is dismissed.
2. There is no question for certification.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Russell
[Traduction]: Le demandeur sollicite le contrôle judiciaire, en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [la Loi], de la décision en date du 28 août 2012 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié [la SPR] a refusé de lui reconnaître la qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention ou de personne à protéger aux termes des articles 96 et 97 de la Loi.
CONTEXTE
[2]
Le demandeur est citoyen pakistanais. Il est arrivé au Canada au mois d'avril 2010 en possession d'un visa d'étudiant. Il a brièvement étudié à Toronto, de mai à juillet 2010, mais il a abandonné ses études pour cause de stress. Il a présenté sa demande d'asile au mois de novembre 2010; la SPR l'a entendue le 23 août 2012, assistée d'un interprète urdu-anglais, et elle l'a rejetée cinq jours plus tard, le 28 août 2012, la jugeant non crédible.
[3]
Le demandeur dit avoir été menacé et agressé par une organisation religieuse extrémiste au Pakistan, le Sepah-E-Sehaba (SSP), après avoir noué une relation amoureuse avec la fille d'un des chefs de l'organisation, prénommée Faiza. Il affirme qu'il serait en danger de mort s'il était renvoyé au Pakistan.
[4]
Le demandeur explique qu'en raison de différences religieuses il n'était pas considéré comme un prétendant acceptable pour Faiza, mais qu'il était amoureux et ne voulait pas mettre fin à la relation. Après que Faiza a informé sa mère de leur relation, les deux amoureux, ainsi que la famille du demandeur, ont reçu des menaces et ont été en butte à la violence. Il affirme que le père de Faiza l'a battue violemment le 8 juillet 2009, puis encore à la fin septembre, lui cassant la jambe. Il dit que le 15 juillet 2009, au retour de la prière du matin, des hommes armés ont tiré sur son père et lui, tuant son père. Des membres du SSP auraient proféré des menaces de mort contre lui et l'auraient battu le 12 février 2010, après quoi il se serait caché jusqu'à ce qu'il obtienne son visa d'étudiant et s'enfuie au Canada au mois d'avril 2010. Enfin, au mois de novembre 2010, alors qu'il était déjà au Canada, des membres du SSP qui étaient à sa recherche ont tiré des coups de feu sur la maison familiale et y ont mis le feu. Le demandeur soutient que le SSP continue de le menacer parce que Faiza refuse d'épouser un autre prétendant choisi par son père. Il indique que des membres du SSP sont allés à la maison familiale au mois de février 2011 et ont proféré des menaces contre lui, et que Faiza l'a informé, lors de leur dernière conversation, au mois de juillet 2012, que le SSP représentait toujours un danger pour lui.
[5]
Le demandeur affirme également qu'il a été brutalement battu par des membres éloignés de sa propre famille pour avoir refusé d'épouser une cousine à laquelle on l'avait fiancé contre son gré au mois de décembre 2008 sur les instances des membres âgés de la famille. Lorsque le demandeur a rompu ses fiançailles avec sa cousine à cause de sa relation avec Faiza, le père et les frères de sa cousine ainsi que des amis à eux l'ont agressé au mois de mai 2009 à cause de la honte qu'il leur avait causée. Son oncle continuerait de menacer de le tuer, devant sa mère, la dernière fois étant en mars 2012.
DÉCISION SOUMISE AU CONTRÔLE
[6]
En rejetant la demande d'asile, la SPR a indiqué que la question déterminante était celle de la crédibilité et a signalé des contradictions et des points faibles dans la preuve du demandeur. Elle a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, le demandeur n'avait pas éprouvé les problèmes qu'il avait décrits, aux mains de sa famille, de la famille de Faiza et du SSP.
[7]
La SPR a signalé que l'exposé circonstancié du formulaire de renseignements personnels [FRP] du demandeur mentionnait qu'il avait [traduction] « été poursuivi » par des hommes armés le matin du 15 juillet 2009, jour où son père a été tué, mais que le demandeur avait témoigné à l'audience que les hommes étaient sortis soudainement d'une auto et avaient commencé à tirer, que son père avait été touché et s'était écroulé sur lui, qui était demeuré à terre sous son père pendant que les hommes s'enfuyaient. Elle a estimé que, compte tenu du témoignage du demandeur, « il n'y a eu aucune poursuite, parce que le demandeur d'asile est demeuré là où il était, son père gisant sur lui ». Elle n'a pas retenu l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle les hommes étaient « arrivés derrière lui ». Le rapport de police concernant l'incident créait une contradiction analogue, parce qu'il mentionne que le demandeur [traduction] « a sauvé sa vie en courant ». La SPR a écarté l'explication selon laquelle il a été désorienté lorsque son père est tombé sur lui, il [traduction] « l'a repoussé et a bougé un peu et est alors [..] lui-même tombé ». Elle a jugé que « bouger un peu n'est pas la même chose que de s'enfuir », et elle a conclu que la preuve du demandeur au sujet de ces événements importants n'était pas cohérente et qu'il n'avait pas fourni d'explication raisonnable lorsqu'il avait été questionné à propos des contradictions, ce qui portait atteinte à sa crédibilité.
[8]
La SPR a aussi estimé que la preuve du demandeur au sujet du nombre de fois qu'il avait fait appel à la police au Pakistan manquait de cohérence. Dans son FRP, il a indiqué qu'il avait appelé la police le 10 mai et le 13 février 2009, mais n'a pas mentionné le 15 juillet 2009, jour du meurtre de son père. À l'audience, il a déclaré avoir demandé l'aide de la police à trois reprises, dont le 15 juillet 2009. La SPR n'a pas retenu l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle il n'avait pas mentionné avoir personnellement appelé la police, dans le FRP, parce qu'il y avait indiqué que son [traduction] « oncle était allé voir la police ». Signalant que l'incapacité et l'absence de volonté de la police de le protéger constituaient un élément important de la demande d'asile et que les demandeurs d'asile reçoivent instruction, dans le FRP, de préciser les efforts qu'ils ont déployés pour se prévaloir de la protection de l'État et les résultats obtenus, la SPR a conclu qu'il s'agissait d'une « omission notable » qui minait la crédibilité du demandeur.
[9]
La SPR a relevé une autre contradiction, concernant les personnes visées par le rapport de police ou PRI (pour premier rapport d'information) du 15 juillet 2009. Le demandeur a indiqué dans le FRP que la dénonciation visait [traduction] « le SSP », alors qu'en fait le PRI mentionnait [traduction] « des inconnus ». La SPR a rejeté l'explication fournie à l'audience par le demandeur, selon laquelle l'oncle [traduction] « a fait dresser le rapport contre des inconnus, mais je savais que c'étaient eux les responsables ».
[10]
La preuve concernant le moment auquel Faiza a eu la jambe fracturée était également contradictoire, selon la SPR. Bien qu'un affidavit souscrit par une amie de Faiza déclare que c'est arrivé en juillet 2009, le demandeur a témoigné que cela s'était produit à la fin septembre 2009. Signalant que le demandeur avait fourni cet affidavit de sa propre initiative, la SPR a indiqué qu'« [i]l n'est pas logique que ses éléments de preuve oraux et écrits ne concordent pas en ce qui concerne cet incident ».
[11]
Une autre contradiction dans la preuve, relevée par la SPR, concernait les personnes présentes lorsque le père du demandeur a été tué. Le FRP relate que le demandeur et son beau-père sont allés marcher ce matin-là, mais le demandeur a dit dans son témoignage que son père, son oncle et lui étaient ensemble. Le demandeur a expliqué que son [traduction] « oncle était derrière parce qu'il est un peu obèse et il marche lentement », mais la SPR a écarté cette explication, signalant que « [s]i le tribunal acceptait cette explication, cela signifierait que nous ne pouvons considérer que les personnes sont allées se promener ensemble que si elles marchent côte à côte ».
[12]
Selon la SPR, la preuve concernant la façon dont les parents de Faiza avaient appris l'existence de sa relation avec le demandeur était également contradictoire. Suivant le FRP, le demandeur a [traduction] « souvent incité Faiza à parler de sa relation amoureuse à ses parents, mais elle avait peur à cause du caractère obstiné de son père »; le demandeur ajoute [traduction] « [s]on père a appris d'une manière ou d'une autre qu'elle m'aimait ». À l'audience, le demandeur a témoigné que Faiza avait, sur ses instances, informé sa mère de leur relation et que sa mère l'avait dit à son père. Lorsque la contradiction lui a été signalée, le demandeur a simplement répondu que Faiza avait parlé à sa mère parce qu'il avait insisté et parce qu'elle était proche de sa mère, et que cette dernière avait dit qu'elle parlerait à son père.
[13]
La SPR a relevé une contradiction touchant le nombre de fois où le demandeur serait sorti de l'endroit où il se cachait après avoir été agressé par des membres du SSP en février 2010. Le demandeur a témoigné qu'après avoir été soigné, le jour de l'agression, il est allé se cacher chez l'oncle d'un ami à Defence, à environ une heure de route de l'endroit où il avait été attaqué. Plus tard au cours de l'audience, en répondant à la question de savoir s'il lui était arrivé de quitter la maison de l'oncle avant de partir du Pakistan le 27 avril 2010, il a indiqué qu'il était uniquement rendu au bureau de poste pour expédier sa demande de permis d'études au Canada et en prendre livraison. Il avait pourtant témoigné auparavant que, le lendemain de l'attaque, il était allé faire une déclaration à la police dans le district où elle se serait produite. La SPR a vu là une contradiction, et elle a rejeté l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle son ami l'avait amené faire une déclaration à la police le lendemain matin et que [traduction] « c'était pendant la journée où je m'installais ... ». La SPR a jugé que le demandeur avait changé son témoignage concernant la question de savoir s'il était sorti de chez l'oncle de son ami pour aller au poste de police.
[14]
La SPR a vu une contradiction dans l'omission du demandeur d'indiquer dans le FRP que des policiers lui avaient dit, après la présumée attaque de février 2010, avoir reçu l'ordre de leurs supérieurs de ne pas établir de rapport contre le SSP. Le demandeur a déclaré à l'audience que la police avait refusé d'établir un PRI [traduction] « [p]arce qu'ils ont dit que je n'avais pas de preuve [...] [e]t ils ont dit que des ordres d'en haut [...] leur interdisaient d'établir [...] des PRI contre cette organisation ». Il avait écrit dans le FRP que [traduction] « le policier a trouvé un prétexte pour ne pas dresser de PRI contre le SSP » en ajoutant à la main la mention [traduction] « je n'avais pas de preuve ». Selon la SPR, l'omission du demandeur de mentionner que la police avait refusé d'établir un PRI parce qu'elle avait ordre d'agir ainsi, alors que sa demande d'asile reposait en grande partie sur l'absence de volonté de protection de l'État, était une omission importante qui minait sa crédibilité.
[15]
Il y avait aussi une contradiction, selon la SPR, au sujet des événements survenus le 11 novembre 2010, lorsque la maison familiale aurait été incendiée. Le FRP indique uniquement que [traduction] « des fanatiques du SSP sont venus, ont essayé de savoir où je me trouvais et ont tiré des coups de feu sur la maison pour me tuer », sans mentionner d'incendie. La SPR a rejeté l'explication du demandeur fondée sur sa mauvaise connaissance de l'anglais, selon laquelle il avait voulu dire qu'il y avait eu à la fois des coups de feu et un incendie. La SPR a fait remarquer que le demandeur avait l'aide d'un conseil, qu'il pouvait recourir à un interprète pour remplir son FRP et qu'il avait déclaré par écrit au début de l'audience que son FRP était « complet, véridique et exact ».
[16]
Au sujet de ce même incident, la SPR a relevé que la coupure de presse relative à l'incendie soumise en preuve par le demandeur ne mentionnait pas le SSP, et elle a rejeté l'explication de ce dernier que c'était parce que [traduction] « les gens ordinaires ne savent pas qui ils sont ».
[17]
La SPR a considéré que le demandeur s'est contredit, dans son témoignage, au sujet de sa connaissance d'autres personnes qui avaient reçu des menaces du SSP. Il avait d'abord témoigné que les médias avaient fait état de telles menaces, mais qu'il ne connaissait lui-même personne qui ait été menacé. Toutefois, un affidavit souscrit par un ami renferme une déclaration selon laquelle l'aide qu'il avait apportée au demandeur lui avait valu des menaces du SSP. Interrogé au sujet de cette contradiction, le demandeur a répondu qu'il croyait que le commissaire avait [traduction] « posé une question générale », réponse que la SPR n'a pas jugé satisfaisante.
[18]
La SPR a également mis en doute l'authenticité de plusieurs documents fournis par le demandeur à l'appui de sa demande d'asile. Citant des éléments de preuve objectifs établissant que les documents frauduleux sont courants au Pakistan (cartable national de documentation (CND) sur le Pakistan (4 juin 2012), point 3.3) tout en reconnaissant que les documents du demandeur n'étaient pas nécessairement faux pour autant, la SPR a indiqué que la vigilance était justifiée et exprimé des doutes au sujet de l'authenticité de plusieurs documents soumis en preuve, notamment: des affidavits qui auraient été souscrits au Pakistan, le certificat de décès de son père et le rapport l'accompagnant, les billets de médecin relatifs aux soins reçus par le demandeur après qu'il aurait été battu et les billets se rapportant aux soins donnés à sa mère et sa sœur par suite de la présumée agression perpétrée en novembre 2010 à la maison familiale. Relativement aux billets et rapports médicaux, la SPR a également indiqué qu'ils ne mentionnaient ni les circonstances dans lesquelles les blessures avaient été infligées ni qui les avaient infligées. Pour ce qui est d'établir la véracité des allégations du demandeur, la SPR n'a donc attribué « aucun poids » à ces documents. S'agissant des coupures de presse soumises par le demandeur au sujet de la mort de son père et de l'incendie de la maison familiale, la SPR a indiqué qu'elles présentaient des « irrégularités importantes à première vue », notamment du texte et des photos mal alignés ou se chevauchant, et que le demandeur avait été incapable de fournir une explication. Bien qu'elle n'ait pas expressément conclu que les coupures étaient frauduleuses, la SPR a cité une décision de notre Cour (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]) affirmant que « [l]a Commission ne devrait pas être traitée comme une école de formation où les faussaires peuvent exercer leur métier », et elle n'a accordé aucun poids aux documents.
[19]
La SPR a aussi conclu que le comportement du demandeur, qui avait attendu quatre mois après avoir cessé d'étudier pour faire une demande d'asile, ne concordait pas avec la crainte subjective qu'il disait éprouver pour sa vie et sa sécurité. Signalant qu'on peut s'attendre à ce qu'une crainte véritable incite à présenter une demande l'asile à la première occasion, elle a jugé déraisonnable, compte tenu de la gravité des incidents décrits, l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle il pensait que les choses s'amélioreraient et qu'il pourrait retourner au Pakistan.
[20]
L'effet cumulatif de ces doutes en matière de crédibilité a amené la SPR à conclure qu'il n'existait aucune possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur d'asile soit persécuté au Pakistan ni qu'il y soit personnellement exposé à une menace à sa vie, au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités ou au risque d'être soumis à la torture.
QUESTION EN LITIGE
[21]
La question qui se pose en l'espèce est de savoir si la SPR a rendu une décision raisonnable, compte tenu de ses conclusions en matière de crédibilité, de son appréciation de la preuve documentaire et de ses conclusions relatives à la crainte subjective.
NORME DE CONTRÔLE
[22]
Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], la Cour suprême du Canada a statué qu'il n'est pas nécessaire de procéder dans tous les cas à l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle. Lorsque la norme applicable à une question particulière est bien établie, la cour de révision peut l'adopter. L'examen des quatre facteurs que comporte l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle n'intervient que lorsqu'aucune norme établie n'est applicable ou que la jurisprudence semble être devenue incompatible avec les principes de common law régissant le contrôle judiciaire tels qu'ils ont évolué:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[23]
Les parties conviennent que la norme qui s'applique à la décision de la SPR est celle de la décision raisonnable. Je suis d'accord.
[24]
Lorsqu'une décision est contrôlée selon la norme de la décision raisonnable, l'analyse se rapporte à « la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47, et
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  déraisonnable, au sens où elle n'appartient pas aux « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ».
DISPOSITIONS LÉGISLATIVES
[25]
Les dispositions suivantes de la Loi s'appliquent en l'espèce:
Définition de « réfugié »
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a)
soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b)
soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a)
soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b)
soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats
Convention refugee
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a)
is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b)
not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in need of protection
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a)
to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b)
to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
ARGUMENTS
Le demandeur
[26]
Le demandeur soutient que la décision est déraisonnable. Selon lui, la conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle sa demande d'asile manque de crédibilité procède d'un zèle exagéré ainsi que d'un examen à la loupe des allégations faites à l'appui de la demande et d'une comparaison tout aussi tatillonne entre son témoignage et l'exposé circonstancié du FRP, en dépit de la mise en garde de notre Cour à l'encontre d'une telle démarche:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La SPR a déraisonnablement rejeté tous les documents soumis à l'appui de la demande d'asile en se fondant sur de simples suppositions et sans disposer de preuve permettant de douter de leur authenticité. En outre, elle a soulevé la question du retard à demander asile au Canada, alors qu'elle avait [traduction] « sèchement » expédié cette question à l'audience et que le demandeur pouvait fournir une explication raisonnable et plausible.
[27]
Le demandeur fait valoir que la demande d'asile reposait directement sur la question du rapport entre les relations amoureuses et les croyances religieuses, l'honneur et la culture au Pakistan, et que la SPR ne s'est pas montrée sensible aux différences culturelles touchant [traduction] « les façons dont les choses se passent au Pakistan, par rapport au Canada ». Des éléments de preuve et des allégations pouvant paraître tout à fait improbables et non crédibles en contexte canadien peuvent être très plausibles et crédibles en contexte pakistanais:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[28]
En outre, la SPR a déraisonnablement omis de tenir compte de facteurs étayant la crédibilité du demandeur et de leur attribuer le poids qu'il fallait:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Aguilar Zacarias
]. La Cour a statué qu'il est possible de tirer des conclusions favorables en matière de crédibilité même en présence d'incohérences, d'omissions et de contradictions, autrement il ne serait guère utile de tenir une audience:
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En l'espèce, le demandeur a témoigné de façon franche et spontanée, avec l'attitude et le comportement de quelqu'un qui témoignait d'incidents réels, notamment une grande émotivité lorsqu'il a été question de la mort de son père, et il a réuni des éléments de preuve documentaire à l'appui de la plus grande partie, voire la totalité, de ses principales allégations.
[29]
Les demandeurs sont présumés dire la vérité et, en l'absence de preuve contredisant leurs allégations, on ne peut attaquer leur crédibilité en arguant de l'omission de fournir des éléments de preuve corroborante sur un point donné:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Selon le demandeur, l'accent mis par la SPR sur son omission de fournir des documents indique qu'elle s'est irrégulièrement fondée sur l'absence de documents corroborants pour tirer des conclusions négatives sur sa crédibilité.
[30]
La crédibilité des documents eux-mêmes ne peut non plus être mise en doute sans raison valable. Les documents [traduction] « de nature officielle » sont présumés authentiques à moins qu'une preuve contraire permette de douter de leur crédibilité:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 11-12;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En l'espèce, la SPR a mis en doute la crédibilité de rapports de police et de rapports médicaux et celle des affidavits les accompagnant, sans disposer de preuves lui permettant de le faire. L'affirmation de la SPR que les affidavits ne présentent pas de « caractéristique de sécurité » et qu'il est impossible d'en connaître l'origine n'est que pure supposition. En outre, la SPR s'est appuyée à tort et de façon déraisonnable sur la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, pour étayer sa conclusion au sujet des documents frauduleux. Dans cette affaire les documents du demandeur d'asile avaient été transmis pour analyse et vérification à l'ASFC, et l'analyse avait démontré qu'ils avaient été nettoyés et modifiés grâce à un procédé chimique et qu'il y avait eu du couper/coller, notamment l'insertion de nouvelles photos et signatures, alors qu'ici la SPR s'est éloignée de la preuve qui lui a été présentée et s'est aventurée sur le terrain des suppositions en formulant injustement, au sujet de la crédibilité et de la plausibilité, des doutes tout simplement dépourvus de validité:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[31]
Selon le demandeur, il n'y a pas de contradiction réelle ou importante dans les disparités relevées par la SPR. Au sujet de la façon dont le père de Faiza a eu connaissance de leur relation, il fait valoir que, si la déclaration qu'il l'a appris [traduction] « d'une manière ou d'une autre » est un peu imprécise, l'audience visait justement à lui permettre d'étoffer les principales allégations écrites et à le confronter à des questions plus détaillées. L'essentiel de l'allégation - la relation, la connaissance qu'en ont eue les parents de Faiza et les menaces et agressions subséquentes - était exposé dans le FRP et a été mentionné à l'audience.
[32]
Quant à la relation des faits survenus le matin où le père du demandeur a été tué, même en faisant abstraction de l'explication raisonnable et plausible selon laquelle plusieurs mots ou expressions peuvent correspondre, en urdu, au verbe [traduction] « poursuivre » [
chase
, en anglais], elle est exacte même en fonction du verbe anglais. Peu de gens contesteraient qu'on puisse se sentir poursuivi quand on se fait tirer dessus par des individus arrivant par derrière en auto alors qu'on retourne à pied à la maison.
[33]
Le demandeur soutient que la SPR a abusivement mis l'accent sur une omission, dans le FRP, concernant les démarches qu'il a faites pour obtenir la protection de la police. Les incidents du 15 juillet 2009 étaient décrits dans le FRP, et le rapport de police initial (ou PRI) s'y rapportant a été déposé. Le demandeur a indiqué dans le FRP que son oncle avait déclaré les incidents à la police, ce que confirme le PRI et, bien qu'il ait omis de mentionner qu'il avait personnellement cherché à obtenir la protection de la police à ce moment, il ne s'agit pas là d'une omission importante:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (juge Crampton, à présent juge en chef);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  omissions ne sont pas toutes déterminantes pour la crédibilité; il faut plutôt examiner leur nature ainsi que le contexte dans lequel sont présentés les nouveaux renseignements:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La totalité de ce qui s'est passé se dégageait de l'ensemble de la preuve présentée à la SPR, et il était abusif et déraisonnable de fonder sur cette omission une conclusion négative quant à la crédibilité.
[34]
Les conclusions négatives de la SPR en matière de crédibilité découlant d'autres divergences dans la preuve du demandeur sont elles aussi déraisonnables. L'explication du demandeur selon laquelle, le matin où son père a été assassiné, son oncle traînait derrière eux à cause de son obésité était raisonnable. Le demandeur a également expliqué de façon raisonnable que, même si son FRP n'indiquait pas qu'il avait appris de la police, en février 2010, qu'elle avait ordre de ne pas faire de rapport au sujet du SSP, le refus de la police d'en dresser un y était bel et bien mentionné.
[35]
Le demandeur soutient qu'on ne peut raisonnablement lui demander de dissiper de prétendues contradictions résultant de souvenirs inexacts ou d'actes d'autres personnes. Le PRI établi le 15 juillet 2009 ne mentionnait pas expressément le SSP, mais ce n'est pas le demandeur qui a déposé la plainte, et son oncle n'était pas à l'audience pour témoigner de ce qu'il avait dit à la police. La SPR ne peut s'attendre à ce que le demandeur explique pourquoi le PRI a été rédigé de cette manière ni pourquoi certains termes ont été employés:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Il en va de même pour la déclaration portant que Faiza a eu la jambe fracturée en juillet 2009 figurant dans l'affidavit souscrit par une tierce personne, alors que, selon les souvenirs du demandeur, c'était en septembre 2009.
[36]
Il fait valoir en outre qu'une demande d'asile tardive n'est pas en soi indicative d'absence de crainte subjective ou de non-crédibilité de la demande d'asile, et qu'il faut donner aux demandeurs d'asile la possibilité d'expliquer le retard:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1re inst.). En l'espèce, le demandeur s'est fait poser une question au sujet du retard, et il a fourni une explication raisonnable: il espérait que sa situation s'améliorerait au Pakistan et qu'il pourrait simplement retourner chez lui; en attendant, il disposait d'un visa d'étudiant valide, et rien n'indiquait que l'Agence des services frontaliers du Canada serait vite au courant qu'il avait cessé d'étudier et prendrait une mesure de renvoi.
[37]
Le demandeur affirme que ces erreurs de raisonnement de la SPR constituent un manquement à l'obligation de fournir des motifs répondant aux critères de justification, de transparence et d'intelligibilité (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), et que l'arrêt
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Newfoundland Nurses
], n'a pas pour effet d'éliminer cette obligation.
Le défendeur
[38]
Selon le défendeur, la décision de rejeter la demande d'asile pour absence de crédibilité était raisonnable: le témoignage du demandeur, tant oral qu'écrit, comportait de nombreuses omissions ou contradictions concernant des faits importants. Sa preuve documentaire n'étayait pas ses allégations et, parfois même, les contredisait.
[39]
Le défendeur souligne que les décisions en matière de crédibilité relèvent de l'expertise de la SPR, laquelle a eu la possibilité d'observer directement le demandeur et se trouvait donc la mieux placée pour évaluer sa crédibilité ou la plausibilité de ses déclarations. La Cour ne doit pas substituer son opinion à celle de la SPR, relativement à la crédibilité, même s'il est possible de tirer une conclusion différente:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), et la présomption qu'un témoignage sous serment est véridique peut être repoussée s'il y a des motifs de douter de sa véracité:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité. En l'espèce, il existait des raisons de douter de la véracité du demandeur, et la SPR a exposé ses conclusions relatives à la crédibilité en termes clairs et explicites, en se fondant sur de nombreuses contradictions entre le témoignage et la preuve documentaire du demandeur. Le demandeur prétend que les faits permettaient de tirer d'autres conclusions, mais la possibilité d'interpréter autrement la preuve n'indique pas en soi qu'une erreur susceptible de contrôle a été commise:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
Ma
].
[40]
La grande émotivité manifestée par le demandeur lors de son témoignage au sujet de la mort de son père ne contribue pas à établir sa crédibilité. Au contraire, le « comportement », s'entendant des hésitations ou incertitudes dans les réponses aux questions, peut entrer en ligne de compte et fonder des conclusions défavorables lorsqu'un témoin peine à donner des réponses directes et adéquates, des conclusions exagérément subjectives fondées sur la manière d'être ou sur la perception d'une attitude « n'ont pas leur place dans l'évaluation de la crédibilité »:
Aguilar Zacarias
, précité, au para 24.
[41]
Les conclusions de la SPR au sujet de la crédibilité se rapportaient aux éléments fondamentaux de la demande d'asile. La SPR a raisonnablement conclu, par exemple, que le demandeur n'a pas toujours décrit la mort de son père de la même façon. Il y a une grande différence entre fuir (être [traduction] « poursuivi » et être étendu au sol, inconscient, sous le corps d'une autre personne. Le rejet des raisons données par le demandeur pour expliquer pourquoi la présence de l'oncle lors de cet important événement n'est pas mentionnée au FRP est également raisonnable. Que trois personnes apparentées revenant de la prière du matin ne soient pas considérées comme cheminant ensemble simplement parce que l'une d'entre elles marche plus lentement n'a tout bonnement aucun sens.
[42]
Les conclusions relatives à la crédibilité fondées sur d'autres omissions dans le FRP ou d'autres contradictions entre le FRP et le témoignage du demandeur étaient également raisonnables, compte tenu, plus particulièrement, de la directive suivante donnée aux demandeurs d'asile à l'article 31 du FRP: « [e]xposez dans l'ordre chronologique tous les événements importants et les raisons qui vous ont amené à demander l'asile au Canada ». L'omission du présumé incendie de la maison familiale, celle de sa démarche pour obtenir l'aide de la police le 15 juillet 2009 et la contradiction concernant la façon dont les parents de Faiza ont appris l'existence de leur relation permettent toutes d'étayer raisonnablement les conclusions négatives au sujet de sa crédibilité. Il en va de même pour la contradiction au sujet du moment et de l'endroit où le demandeur a signalé l'agression de février 2010 à la police et pour l'absence, dans le FRP, de toute mention du fait que la police avait alors refusé de dresser un rapport contre le SSP pour obéir à un ordre de la direction. Compte tenu du contexte, l'omission de mentionner ce dernier fait dans le FRP n'a pas de sens.
[43]
Le défendeur rappelle à la Cour que les contradictions ne sont pas le seul fondement possible d'une conclusion défavorable en matière de crédibilité; la SPR peut également fonder une telle conclusion sur l'omission de présenter dès le départ des renseignements cruciaux pour une demande d'asile. La SPR a le droit d'examiner si un demandeur d'asile embellit des faits importants ou en ajoute pour étayer l'allégation de crainte de persécution:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En outre, la SPR n'est généralement pas tenue de faire état de ses conclusions sur la crédibilité globale de la preuve:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[44]
Contrairement à ce que prétend le demandeur, la SPR n'a pas conclu hâtivement que les documents étaient frauduleux; elle les a examinés avec la minutie voulue, a relevé que les caractéristiques de sécurité faisaient défaut, constaté les contradictions dans la preuve du demandeur et, compte tenu de cette preuve dans son ensemble, elle a raisonnablement décidé de n'attribuer aucun poids aux documents pour ce qui d'établir le bien-fondé de la demande d'asile. Au soutien de la conclusion de la SPR au sujet des coupures de presse, le défendeur fait remarquer que l'article relatif à la mort du père du demandeur reprend presque mot à mot le rapport de police:
Newfoundland Nurses
, précité, au para 16.
[45]
À l'argument voulant que la SPR aurait pu demander que les documents soient authentifiés, le défendeur oppose que c'est au demandeur qu'il incombe de présenter des éléments de preuve crédibles à l'appui de sa demande d'asile:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[46]
Selon le défendeur, il était également raisonnable pour la SPR de conclure que la présentation tardive de la demande d'asile dénotait une absence de crainte subjective. Le retard à demander asile est un facteur important que la SPR est admise à prendre en compte:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA). Il indique une absence de crainte subjective de persécution, parce qu'on peut logiquement penser qu'une personne en proie à une véritable crainte demandera asile à la première occasion:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 16. Étant donné la gravité des événements relatés par le demandeur et la précarité inhérente de son statut au Canada (son visa l'obligeant à étudier à plein temps), il était raisonnable que la SPR conclue que le demandeur aurait dû demander asile à la première occasion et rejette les raisons qu'il a invoquées pour expliquer son défaut de le faire. L'argument que la conclusion est erronée parce qu'une seule question a été posée au demandeur à ce sujet est sans fondement, le demandeur n'ayant cité aucune décision posant qu'un nombre minimal de questions doit être posé pour que la SPR parvienne à la conviction qu'elle peut formuler une conclusion sur un point donné.
ANALYSE
[47]
La Cour est souvent appelée à contrôle des décisions de ce genre, où de « nombreux problèmes soulevés quant à la crédibilité », pris cumulativement, amènent la SPR à conclure à l'inexistence du risque invoqué à l'appui de la demande d'asile.
[48]
Comme il est d'usage, en de tels cas, le demandeur allègue que la décision est déraisonnable parce que la SPR a procédé à un examen à la loupe de la preuve, a rejeté les explications raisonnables qu'il a fournies à l'égard des contradictions relevées dans la preuve, a tiré des conclusions conjecturales sans fondement probatoire, n'a pas été sensible au contexte culturel en cause et n'a pas tenu compte de la totalité de la preuve que le demandeur a rassemblée à l'appui des aspects fondamentaux de sa demande d'asile.
[49]
Le demandeur soutient que sa preuve fournissait un compte rendu cohérent de ses [traduction] « allégations de fond », étayé par une abondante documentation dont la SPR a fait abstraction lorsqu'elle s'est mise à disséquer [traduction] « des formulations particulières employées dans des éléments de preuve testimoniale ou documentaire ».
[50]
Dans ce genre de demande, la Cour doit elle aussi examiner à la loupe chacune des conclusions pour déterminer si elles présentent des erreurs suffisantes pour être déclarées déraisonnables. Par beaucoup d'aspects, cette démarche constitue une invitation à revoir et réévaluer la preuve de façon à produire une issue favorable au demandeur.
[51]
Des principes bien établis doivent être présents à l'esprit lorsqu'on entreprend une telle démarche.
[52]
Premièrement, la SPR est la mieux placée pour évaluer la crédibilité, et la Cour doit faire preuve de déférence à l'égard de ses conclusions en cette matière; elle ne peut simplement substituer son appréciation à celle de la SPR, même s'il était possible de tirer une conclusion différente. Voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité.
[53]
La Cour doit également garder à l'esprit que la possibilité de tirer d'autres conclusions raisonnables des faits ne rend pas en soi la décision de la SPR déraisonnable. Voir, par exemple,
Ma
, précité, au paragraphe 28.
[54]
Les conclusions en matière de plausibilité appellent une déférence moindre mais, encore là, la SPR peut formuler des conclusions raisonnables en se fondant sur les invraisemblances, le bon sens et la raison, et elle peut rejeter des éléments de preuve qui ne concordent pas avec les probabilités se dégageant de l'affaire dans son ensemble. Voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 4.
[55]
En l'espèce, la SPR a fait état de nombreux doutes en matière de crédibilité découlant de contradictions entre le témoignage, le FRP et la preuve documentaire du demandeur et se rapportant à des aspects fondamentaux de sa demande. Dans le présent contrôle judiciaire, le demandeur invite la Cour à examiner tour à tour chacune des conclusions de la SPR et, en fait, à réévaluer toute sa preuve en fonction de son contexte culturel et déclarer chaque conclusion déraisonnable.
[56]
J'ai examiné chaque point et, pour la plupart d'entre eux, je crois devoir conclure que, bien qu'il soit possible de ne pas partager l'avis de la SPR, on ne peut dire que ses conclusions ne font pas parties des issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit. La SPR a suivi la démarche usuelle, consistant à confronter le témoignage du demandeur au FRP et aux autres éléments de preuve et documents afin de déterminer s'il existe des contradictions et à donner ensuite au demandeur la possibilité d'expliquer les contradictions relevées. Cette démarche d'appréciation de la crédibilité a maintes fois reçu l'approbation de la Cour, et je ne vois rien dans le raisonnement de la SPR qui indique qu'elle n'aurait pas tenu compte du contexte culturel ou des conditions existant dans le pays d'origine du demandeur avec l'attention ou la sensibilité voulues.
[57]
Il existait d'importantes contradictions concrètes à l'égard des points suivants:
(a) Le témoignage du demandeur au sujet de l'agression du SSP contre son père et lui ne concordait pas avec le FRP et le rapport de police soumis en preuve, et le demandeur n'a pu expliquer adéquatement les disparités; le rejet de l'explication par la SPR n'était pas déraisonnable.
(b) Le demandeur n'a pu expliquer adéquatement pourquoi l'incendie de la maison familiale par le SSP dont il a parlé dans son témoignage n'avait pas été mentionné dans le FRP. Comme dans de nombreuses autres affaires où le FRP comportait d'importantes omissions, celle de ce fait important dans le FRP, censé comprendre « tous les événements importants et les raisons » ayant mené à la demande d'asile, suscite en l'espèce des doutes au sujet de la crédibilité.
(c) La mention, dans le FRP, que les parents de Faiza avaient appris l'existence de la relation [traduction] « d'une manière ou d'une autre » était nettement en contradiction avec le témoignage subséquent du demandeur selon lequel il avait insisté auprès de Faiza pour qu'elle en parle à sa mère, laquelle en avait fait part à son père. La contradiction n'a pas été raisonnablement expliquée.
(d) Le demandeur n'a pas non plus été cohérent au sujet du nombre de fois où il a fait appel à la police, et le rejet de son explication était raisonnable.
[58]
La SPR a relevé de nombreux autres points qu'elle a signalés au demandeur et que celui-ci n'a pas expliqués de façon satisfaisante selon elle. Il n'est pas nécessaire de tous les énumérer ici, car il ressort de mon examen de la décision, de la transcription et du dossier que, bien qu'il eût été possible de tirer d'autres conclusions raisonnables, on ne peut dire que celles que la SPR a formulées s'écartaient, individuellement ou collectivement, de la norme établie dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Il est possible de ne pas partager l'avis que la SPR sur ces questions, mais la jurisprudence établit clairement qu'à moins de juger que les conclusions de la SPR en matière de crédibilité ne font pas partie des issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit, la Cour ne peut intervenir, même si elle diverge d'opinion et qu'elle aurait formulé d'autres conclusions. C'est là le sens de la déférence. J'aurais pu donner le bénéfice du doute au demandeur pour chacune des questions soulevées, mais il ne s'ensuit pas que la SPR a eu tort de les faire jouer contre lui et de conclure, en bout de ligne, que les allégations manquaient de crédibilité. Dans ce type d'affaires, il est particulièrement important de garder à l'esprit que la Cour n'a pas eu la possibilité d'observer le demandeur lors de son témoignage.
[59]
Un exemple illustrera toutefois ce qui pose problème, de façon générale, dans la façon dont le demandeur aborde le présent contrôle judiciaire. Le demandeur a soumis à la SPR un affidavit souscrit par une amie d'enfance de Faiza, contredisant sa propre déclaration au sujet de la date à laquelle Faiza aurait eu la jambe fracturée. Selon le demandeur, ce serait en septembre, mais l'amie de Faiza a déclaré que Faiza avait déjà la jambe fracturée en juillet. Prié d'expliquer cet écart, le demandeur a simplement réitéré que Faiza n'avait pas la jambe fracturée en juillet. La SPR a traité de cette contradiction dans sa décision:
[22] Le demandeur d'asile a déclaré que le père de Faiza a battu cette dernière et lui a fracturé la jambe à la fin de septembre 2009 en raison de sa relation avec lui et de son refus d'épouser quelqu'un d'autre. Il a affirmé avoir constaté qu'elle avait une fracture à la jambe lorsqu'il l'a vue le 4 octobre 2009, et il pouvait voir le plâtre et les marques sur sa jambe cassée. Il a ajouté que Faiza l'a informé que son père lui avait cassé la jambe et qu'elle n'avait jamais eu de fracture à la jambe auparavant.
[23] À l'appui de ses allégations, le demandeur d'asile a produit un affidavit de l'amie d'enfance de Faiza. Selon cet affidavit, lorsqu'elle a rendu visite à Faiza en juillet 2009, son père lui avait infligé des blessures physiques, notamment une fracture à la jambe. Lorsque le tribunal a signalé que cet affidavit indique que le père de Faiza a cassé la jambe de cette dernière en
juillet
, alors que, selon le témoignage du demandeur d'asile, Faiza s'est fracturé la jambe en
septembre
, le demandeur d'asile a répondu qu'elle n'avait pas la jambe fracturée en juillet. Le tribunal n'est pas convaincu par son explication. Le demandeur d'asile a fourni cet affidavit de sa propre initiative. Il n'est pas logique que ses éléments de preuve oraux et écrits ne concordent pas en ce qui concerne cet incident. Son témoignage incohérent à cet égard mine sa crédibilité.
[60]
Il ne s'agit là que d'une contradiction non expliquée et, à mon avis, elle n'est pas très grave. Elle pourrait difficilement justifier à elle seule de rejeter la demande d'asile pour absence de crédibilité. Toutefois, la demande d'asile a été rejetée en raison des « nombreux problèmes soulevés quant à la crédibilité », et la contradiction concernant la date à laquelle Faiza aurait eu la jambe fracturée n'est qu'un élément d'une longue série de problèmes similaires. C'est le demandeur lui-même, ainsi que l'a indiqué la SPR, qui a déposé en preuve l'affidavit de l'amie. Il devait être au courant de la contradiction. S'il existait une explication, c'était au demandeur de trouver pourquoi l'amie parlait du mois de juillet et de le faire savoir à la SPR. Il a plutôt décidé de présenter une preuve qui n'étayait pas sa déclaration que le père de Faiza aurait fracturé la jambe de sa fille à la fin de septembre. C'était son choix. Il voudrait à présent que la Cour juge déraisonnable l'appréciation de cet élément de preuve faite par la SPR et celle qui a découlé de l'accumulation des problèmes qu'elle a relevés dans l'ensemble de sa preuve. Selon lui, la SPR aurait été trop tatillonne et se serait montrée insensible aux différences culturelles. Cependant, les dates sont toujours examinées dans les demandes d'asile et, s'agissant du moment où quelqu'un a eu la jambe fracturée, aucune incidence culturelle n'explique la différence entre juillet et septembre.
[61]
Je reconnais que certaines des conclusions de la SPR vont un peu trop loin. Par exemple, au sujet de la crainte subjective et de la demande d'asile tardive, la SPR a notamment indiqué:
Le tribunal reconnaît que le demandeur d'asile était titulaire d'un permis d'études. Il a cependant cessé de fréquenter l'école au Canada en juillet 2010, et l'une des conditions assorties à son permis d'études était la fréquentation d'un établissement scolaire à temps plein. Le demandeur d'asile ne respectait plus les conditions assorties à son permis d'études et aurait pu être expulsé en tout temps.
(Décision, au para 40)
[62]
Aucun élément de preuve n'étayait cette conclusion et, en aurait-il eu, rien n'indiquait que le demandeur savait qu'il pouvait être expulsé à tout moment. Ce point n'a pas été abordé avec lui. En conséquence, la décision de la SPR sur cette question repose sur des suppositions et est déraisonnable. Toutefois, ce n'est qu'un aspect mineur de la conclusion de la SPR relative à la crainte subjective; lorsque la conclusion est considérée dans son ensemble, la question de la connaissance du demandeur du risque d'expulsion ne revêt pas beaucoup d'importance:
[41] Le tribunal a demandé au demandeur d'asile pourquoi il n'avait pas demandé l'asile plus tôt. Il a répondu qu'il croyait que les choses s'amélioreraient pour lui. Il ne s'agit pas d'une explication raisonnable parce que le demandeur d'asile affirme qu'il avait peur de vivre au Pakistan un an avant son départ et que son père a été tué. Son explication selon laquelle les choses s'amélioreraient en quelques mois n'est pas raisonnable compte tenu de la gravité de ses allégations. Il est raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'une personne ayant une crainte véritable demande l'asile à la première occasion. Lorsqu'une personne risque d'être renvoyée dans un pays où sa vie est en danger, il est raisonnable de s'attendre, peu importe les recours à sa disposition, à ce qu'elle dise aux autorités qu'elle serait en danger dans son pays si elle devait y retourner. En l'espèce, le demandeur d'asile a attendu environ quatre mois après avoir cessé de fréquenter l'école avant de demander l'asile au Canada. Ses actions à cet égard ne cadrent pas avec sa crainte.
[63]
Le demandeur conteste le bien-fondé de cette conclusion, mais le retard à présenter une demande d'asile est un facteur qui intervient fréquemment dans les conclusions relatives à la crainte subjective, et le demandeur, représenté par un avocat chevronné, en était tout à fait conscient.
[64]
De toute manière, la décision de la SPR n'avait pas l'absence de crainte subjective pour principal fondement. Comme elle l'indique clairement au paragraphe 8, « [l]a question déterminante en l'espèce est celle de la crédibilité ». Le temps mis par le demandeur n'est qu'un facteur supplémentaire qui ne concorde pas avec les aspects essentiels de sa demande d'asile. La jurisprudence de notre Cour reconnaît la validité du raisonnement selon lequel une personne véritablement en proie à la crainte demandera asile à la première occasion. Étant donné la gravité des événements qui, selon le demandeur, avaient mené à la demande d'asile, il n'était pas déraisonnable pour la SPR, de conclure que « [s]es actions à cet égard ne cadrent pas avec sa crainte ».
[65]
De façon générale, je ne relève aucune erreur qui soit assez importante pour rendre la décision de la SPR déraisonnable.
[66]
Les avocats des parties conviennent qu'il n'y a aucune question à certifier, ce qui est également l'avis de la Cour.
JUGEMENT
[67]
LA COUR STATUE que
:
1. La demande est rejetée.
2. Il n'y a aucune question à certifier.
[End of document]