 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 1373)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Gleason, J.
November 27, 2012.
Counsel:
Merachel Benaroch, for the applicant;
Mesimone Truong, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Rachel Benaroch, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Gleason, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001 c 27 [IRPA] of a decision by the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (the panel), dated March 20, 2012, regarding the applicant, Mr. Kazan. The panel determined that the applicant was neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection within the meaning of sections 96 and 97 of the IRPA.
[2]
The panel refused Mr. Kazan's application on the basis that his allegations were not credible. In this application for judicial review, the applicant submits that the panel's finding to this effect is unreasonable. For the reasons that follow, I disagree, and this application for judicial review is therefore dismissed.
Background
[3]
The applicant is a citizen of Lebanon and an Orthodox Christian. He claims to have been in an intimate relationship with Farial Yatema, a Shia Muslim woman. The applicant alleges that their relationship became serious in September 2008.
[4]
On July 29, 2009, the applicant arrived in Canada with a temporary resident visa to attend the baptism of a nephew. The baptism was initially set for August 8, 2009, but was postponed until March 2010 because the child's mother was suffering from anaemia.
[5]
The applicant claims to have received a telephone call from Ms. Yatema on September 1, 2009, during which he learned that she was four months pregnant. The applicant alleges that he advised Ms. Yatema to seek refuge in southern Lebanon, which she did, because they feared the anger of certain members of the Yatema family who had ties to the Hezbollah and would not have accepted the fact that Ms. Yatema had been in a relationship with a Christian man.
[6]
On September 15, 2009, Ms. Yatema was allegedly assassinated by her brother, a police officer and member of the Hezbollah, in an honour killing. The assassination was supposedly covered by the Lebanese media. The applicant claims to have been informed of the murder by a friend who saw the televised report. In his Personal Information Form [PIF], the applicant alleged that after Ms. Yatema's death, her family asked his neighbours and a cousin about him. The applicant claims that members of the Yatema family are still looking for him.
[7]
On June 10, 2010, the applicant claimed refugee protection in Canada. He claims to be a Convention refugee under section 96 of the IRPA on the grounds that he fears persecution by the Yatema family because of his religious affiliation. He also claims to be a person in need of protection under subsection 97(1) of the IRPA because returning to Lebanon would expose him to a danger of torture, a risk to his life or a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment at the hands of the Yatema family.
[8]
In its decision, the panel noted that the applicant had adduced no evidence corroborating his version of the facts. The panel found that the applicant had established neither a well-founded fear under section 96 of the IRPA nor the existence of a serious possibility that he would be persecuted or face the type of hardship described in section 97 of the IRPA. The panel determined that the applicant's allegations were not credible on the grounds that there were three weaknesses in his evidence.
[9]
First, the panel questioned the applicant about the televised report on the murder of Ms. Yatema. The applicant stated that he had attempted to obtain a copy of the report in question through his brother. However, when asked whether his brother had indeed obtained a copy, the applicant replied that he did not know, as his brother was in Beirut and he was in Canada. The panel did not accept this explanation, as the applicant had stated that he was in contact with his brother on a weekly basis, and it concluded that it would have been reasonable for the applicant to have been aware of his brother's actions.
[10]
Second, in his testimony before the panel, the applicant stated that the Yatema family had asked his neighbours about him. However, the panel noted that in his PIF, the applicant had written that the Yatema family had only spoken with his cousin. When questioned about this, the applicant explained that, in his testimony, he had used an Arabic word referring to [translation] "the people close to one's family", which covers both [translation] "neighbours" and [translation] "cousins". However, the interpreter informed the panel that the word the applicant had used was [translation] "neighbour" and that the Arabic language had specific words for [translation] "cousin", as well as words distinguishing between maternal and paternal cousins. The applicant then added that he did not know why he had not mentioned his cousins and that it was merely a language issue. The panel did not accept these explanations and concluded that the applicant's credibility was undermined by these inconsistencies.
[11]
Third, the panel drew a negative inference from the fact that the applicant had no evidence to corroborate Ms. Yatema's existence, her assassination or their intimate relationship. Given that, upon his arrival in Canada in July 2009, the applicant was allegedly so in love with Ms. Yatema that he intended to marry her, the panel found that it would have been reasonable to expect the applicant to have some kind of souvenir from Ms. Yatema, such as a photograph, letter or note, that he could even have [translation] "secretly carried on his person".
Arguments of the parties
[12]
The applicant submits that the panel's decision is unreasonable because its conclusions with respect to the three weaknesses in his evidence are utterly without merit. In particular, he alleges that his lack of awareness of the precise measures taken by his brother to attempt to obtain a copy of the televised report is irrelevant. He also argues that the panel did not properly summarize his testimony with respect to his own efforts with the assistance of his counsel to obtain evidence corroborating Ms. Yatema's assassination. He submits that it is not always possible to corroborate every allegation in the context of a claim for refugee protection and that this is not in itself evidence undermining the credibility of his allegations.
[13]
Second, he submits that the difference between the words [translation] "cousin" and [translation] "neighbour" is not a major contradiction, but rather a minor language issue that should not be relied on to justify the refusal of his claim for refugee protection. He adds that in his testimony he had referred to those [translation] "close" to his family, and that the Arabic word he used includes even distant cousins.
[14]
Finally, he argues that [translation] "the panel is not better placed than he is to decide what is reasonable or not in affairs of the heart" and that the panel had no reason to draw a negative inference from the fact that he had not kept a souvenir of Ms. Yatema.
[15]
The respondent submits, first of all, that the applicant's affidavit in support of his application for leave is not compliant with the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106 [Rules], because it is in French and does not contain the jurat of a translator as required by subsection 80(2.1) of the Rules. The applicant had stated in his PIF that he required the services of a Lebanese Arabic interpreter. The respondent submits that it is therefore reasonable to believe that the applicant does not understand French well and that his affidavit should have been accompanied by the jurat of a translator, adding that pursuant to paragraph 10(2)(
d
) of the
Federal Courts Immigration and Refugee Protection Rules
, SOR/93-22, an affidavit filed in support of an application for leave is an integral part thereof. Therefore, the respondent is of the view that the applicant's affidavit should be rejected by this Court, or, in the alternative, that it should be assigned no probative value.
[16]
With respect to the reasonableness of the panel's decision, the respondent argues that the standard of reasonableness requires that this Court show considerable deference in reviewing findings relating to the applicant's credibility, adding that the panel's decision in this case must be upheld as justifiable given the complete lack of evidence corroborating the applicant's allegations. The respondent submits that the applicant's arguments are not sufficient to justify this Court's intervention and that the applicant's mere disagreement with the decision does not constitute grounds for review (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[17]
With respect to the three weaknesses identified in the applicant's evidence, the respondent submits that the panel's findings were reasonable. It was open to the panel to draw a negative inference from the fact that the applicant was unaware of his brother's actions, given the absence of evidence corroborating his allegations and his admission that he had been communicating with his brother on a weekly basis. In the circumstances, it is inconceivable that the applicant would have failed to question him about such an important element of his claim for refugee protection.
[18]
Similarly, the respondent submits that the negative inference drawn by the panel regarding the lack of a souvenir of Ms. Yatema is reasonable because, when he left for Canada, the applicant was unaware of Ms. Yatema's pregnancy and faced no risk on Canadian soil. This inference is therefore grounded in the evidence before the panel. Finally, with respect to the confusion between the Arabic words for [translation] "neighbour" and [translation] "cousin", the respondent acknowledges that the distinction is somewhat semantic but notes that this point is not central to the panel's decision.
Analysis
[19]
First, regarding the non-compliance of the applicant's affidavit on account of the missing jurat of translation, I adopt the words of my colleague Justice Snider: "I would allow the application to proceed in spite of the flawed Affidavit of the Applicant but would dismiss this application on its merits" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
The sole issue is whether the panel's finding with respect to the applicant's credibility is reasonable. It is well established that questions relating to credibility are reviewed on a standard of reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), 160 NR 315 (FCA) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[21]
As the respondent has pointed out, this Court must show considerable deference in reviewing a panel's findings with respect to credibility (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). It is not open to this Court to reassess the evidence that was before the panel (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
In this case, I am of the view that it all comes down to a lack of evidence. Under section 96 of the IRPA, the applicant was required to show that he had a well-founded fear of persecution, which meant establishing on a balance of probabilities that he had both subjective and objective fear and that no state protection was available to him (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Under section 97 of the IRPA, the applicant had to demonstrate that he faced a serious risk of torture, a threat to his life, or a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment. The applicant has failed to satisfy any of these requirements. Furthermore, the applicant has not submitted any arguments that persuade me that the panel's decision is unreasonable.
[23]
The applicant's first argument involves what the panel considered his incomplete response to the question of what his brother had done to obtain a copy of the media report of the murder. The panel wrote that it [translation] "would have been reasonable for the claimant to know the details about what his brother had done to obtain a copy of the media report on the honour killing"given that they were in contact with each other on a weekly basis.
[24]
The relevant section of the hearing transcripts reads as follows:
[translation]
Q: . . . What has your brother done to try to obtain a copy of the media report, sir?
A: I asked him, I asked him and I don't know what he did, because he is over in Beirut and that's a question that one can't address directly like that, it is difficult to speak directly. So I don't know what he has done.
Q: What do you mean, difficult to speak directly?
A: Where can he, I mean where can he go to ask questions and make inquiries about the report in order to get it? He doesn't have connections, important connections in order to be able to get it.
Q: OK. But I am asking you what he did between you and your brother, if you discussed it, you say that you don't know what he did because it is difficult to speak with him directly.
A: He can't just ask for things like that. With whom could he talk about that? He was not able to get it.
Q: OK. But I am asking you what steps he took to try to obtain it, and you say that you do not know. And I am asking you why you do not know the details of what he did to try to find this report, given that it is critical to your claim for refugee protection.
A: When I spoke with him, I told him anything you have as evidence regarding that situation, but I do not want this to put you at risk, because you are my brother. If you are able to get anything, please, send it to me, give it to me.
[25]
Even having reviewed the applicant's full response, it is clear that he does not know what steps were taken by his brother. I agree with the panel that this is a crucial element of his refugee claim, and it is not credible that he would not have questioned his brother on something so important to his claim.
[26]
As for the confusion between the words [translation] "neighbour" and [translation] "cousin", I find that this was not central to the panel's decision and that it reasonably concluded based on the evidence that this was not merely a language issue. In response to question 31 on his PIF, the applicant wrote the following: [translation] "A few days later, members of her family came to ask about me. First they spoke with my cousin and then with my neighbours."
[27]
At the hearing before the panel, the applicant denied any involvement of his [translation] "cousins" and even stated: [translation] "my cousins do not live near me. It was the people who live next door . . . the cousins do not live near us, it is just close family friends living next door to us, but not the cousins".
[28]
According to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the panel may make adverse findings with respect to an applicant's credibility if it identifies contradictions or inconsistencies in his story or between his story and other evidence (see also <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In this case, it is all the more flagrant in that there is no evidence at all corroborating the applicant's allegations.
[29]
As for the applicant's argument that [translation] "the panel is not better placed than he is to decide what is reasonable or not in affairs of the heart", I find that there was sufficient evidence before the panel to enable it to draw several negative inferences and make reasonable findings on that basis.
[30]
In short, the panel has special and exclusive expertise in assessing the credibility of applicants, which is why "this Court should refrain from interfering with that assessment unless the Board's assessments are capricious or perverse, or patently unreasonable" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> citing <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above). As I found in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 42:
. . . the role of this Court is a very limited one because the tribunal had the advantage of hearing the witnesses testify, observed their demeanor and is alive to all the factual nuances and contradictions in the evidence. Moreover, in many cases, the tribunal has expertise in the subject matter at issue that the reviewing court lacks. It is therefore much better placed to make credibility findings, including those related to implausibility. Also, the efficient administration of justice, which is at the heart of the notion of deference, requires that review of these sorts of issues be the exception as opposed to the general rule. . . .
[31]
No question of general importance was submitted by the parties under section 74 of the IRPA and none arises in this case.
Conclusion
[32]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
JUDGMENT
[33]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT IS that
:
1. This application for judicial review of the decision dated March 20, 2012, by the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board is dismissed.
2. No question of general importance is certified.
3. No costs are awarded.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  contrôle judiciaire présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001 c 27 [LIPR] d'une décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada (le tribunal), rendue le 20 mars 2012 à l'égard du demandeur, M. Kazan. Le tribunal a déterminé que le demandeur n'avait ni la qualité de « réfugié au sens de la Convention » ni celle de « personne à protéger » au sens des articles 96 et 97 de la LIPR.
[2]
Le tribunal a rejeté la demande de M. Kazan puisqu'il a conclu que ses allégations n'étaient pas crédibles. Dans la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire, le demandeur soumet que la conclusion du tribunal à cet effet n'est pas raisonnable. Pour les motifs qui suivent, je ne suis pas d'accord et cette demande de contrôle judiciaire est ainsi rejetée.
Le contexte
[3]
Le demandeur est citoyen du Liban et de religion chrétienne orthodoxe. Il prétend avoir eu une relation intime au Liban avec Farial Yatema, une femme musulmane chiite. Le demandeur allègue que leur relation serait devenue sérieuse au mois de septembre 2008.
[4]
Le 29 juillet 2009, le demandeur est arrivé au Canada en possession d'un visa de résident temporaire afin d'assister au baptême d'un neveu. Le baptême était initialement fixé pour le 8 août 2009 mais a été reporté au mois de mars 2010 en raison de l'anémie dont souffrait la mère de l'enfant.
[5]
Le demandeur prétend qu'il a reçu un appel téléphonique de Mme Yatema le 1er septembre 2009 au cours duquel il a appris qu'elle était enceinte de quatre mois. Le demandeur allègue qu'il a conseillé à MmeYatema de se réfugier dans le sud du Liban, ce qu'elle a fait, puisqu'ils craignaient la colère de certains membres de la famille Yatema qui, liés au Hezbollah, n'auraient pas accepté le fait que Mme Yatema avait eu une relation avec un homme chrétien.
[6]
Le 15 septembre 2009, Mme Yatema aurait été assassinée par son frère, un policier et membre du Hezbollah, aux termes d'un crime d'honneur. L'assassinat aurait fait l'objet d'une couverture médiatique au Liban. Le demandeur prétend qu'il aurait été mis au courant de ce meurtre par l'entremise d'un ami qui aurait vu le reportage télévisé. Dans son Formulaire de renseignements personnels [FRP], le demandeur allègue que suite au décès de Mme Yatema, la famille de cette dernière s'est enquise à son sujet auprès de ses voisins et d'un cousin. Le demandeur allègue que les membres de la famille Yatema sont toujours à sa recherche.
[7]
Le 10 juin 2010, le demandeur a demandé l'asile au Canada. Il allègue avoir la qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention suivant l'article 96 de la LIPR au motif qu'il craint la persécution de la famille Yatema en raison de son appartenance religieuse. Il prétend également être une personne à protéger au sens du paragraphe 97(1) de la LIPR puisqu'il risque d'être soumis à la torture ou d'être exposé à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités par la famille Yatema advenant son retour au Liban.
[8]
Dans sa décision, le tribunal a noté que le demandeur n'avait aucune preuve corroborant sa version des faits. Le tribunal a conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas démontré qu'il éprouvait une crainte fondée suivant l'article 96 de la LIPR et qu'il n'avait pas établi l'existence d'une possibilité sérieuse qu'il soit persécuté ou qu'il subirait un préjudice au sens de l'article 97 de la LIPR. Le tribunal a déterminé que les allégations du demandeur n'étaient pas crédibles sur la base de trois faiblesses contenues dans sa preuve.
[9]
D'abord, le tribunal a interrogé le demandeur au sujet du reportage télévisé du meurtre de Mme Yatema. Le demandeur a confirmé qu'il avait cherché à obtenir une copie dudit reportage et a précisé l'avoir demandée à son frère. Toutefois, à la question de savoir si son frère avait effectivement obtenu cette copie, le demandeur a répondu qu'il ne le savait pas puisque son frère était à Beyrouth alors qu'il était au Canada. Le tribunal n'a pas accepté cette explication étant donné que le demandeur a déclaré avoir des contacts avec son frère sur une base hebdomadaire et a conclu qu'il aurait été raisonnable pour le demandeur de connaître les actions prises par son frère.
[10]
Deuxièmement, dans le cadre de son témoignage devant le tribunal, le demandeur a déclaré que la famille Yatema s'était enquise à son sujet auprès de ses voisins. Toutefois, le tribunal a noté que dans son FRP, le demandeur y indique que la famille Yatema s'était renseignée auprès de son cousin seulement. Interrogé sur ce point, le demandeur a expliqué que, dans son témoignage, il avait utilisé un mot arabe qui réfère à « l'entourage de sa famille », ce qui comprendrait « voisins » et « cousins ». L'interprète a cependant informé le tribunal que le mot utilisé par le demandeur était « voisin » et que la langue arabe a des mots précis pour faire référence à « cousin », en plus de mots pour distinguer un cousin maternel d'un cousin paternel. Le demandeur a ajouté par la suite qu'il ne savait pas pourquoi il n'avait pas précisé ses cousins et qu'il ne s'agissait que d'une question de langue. Le tribunal n'a pas accepté ces explications et a conclu que la crédibilité du demandeur était minée en raison de ces incohérences.
[11]
Troisièmement, le tribunal a tiré une inférence négative du fait que le demandeur n'avait aucune preuve pour corroborer l'existence de Mme Yatema, ni son assassinat, ni leur relation intime. Compte tenu du fait qu'au moment de son arrivée au Canada en juillet 2009 le demandeur aurait été amoureux de Mme Yatema au point où il prévoyait l'épouser, le tribunal a estimé qu'il aurait été raisonnable que le demandeur possède un souvenir, comme une photographie, une lettre ou une note de la part de Mme Yatema, qu'il aurait même pu « garder sur lui en secret ».
Arguments des parties
[12]
Le demandeur soumet que la décision du tribunal est déraisonnable puisque ses conclusions quant aux trois faiblesses contenues dans la preuve du demandeur sont dépourvues de tout fondement. Plus particulièrement, il allègue que le fait de ne pas savoir exactement les démarches entreprises par son frère pour tenter d'obtenir une copie du reportage télévisé n'est pas pertinent. De plus, il souligne que le tribunal n'a pas bien résumé son témoignage par rapport aux efforts qu'il avait lui-même faits avec l'aide de son avocate pour obtenir une preuve corroborant l'assassinat de Mme Yatema. Il soumet à cet égard qu'il n'est pas toujours possible de corroborer toutes les allégations dans le cadre d'une demande d'asile et qu'il ne s'agit pas là d'une preuve minant la crédibilité de ses allégations.
[13]
En second lieu, il soumet que la différence entre les mots « cousin » et « voisin » n'est pas une contradiction majeure mais bien un simple détail de langue et ne devrait pas être retenue comme motif justifiant le rejet de sa demande d'asile. Il ajoute qu'il a plutôt employé le mot « proches » dans ses témoignages et qu'en arabe, ce mot comprend les cousins même éloignés.
[14]
Enfin, il souligne que « le tribunal n'est pas mieux placé que lui pour décider dans des affaires de cœur ce qui est raisonnable ou non » et qu'il n'y avait aucune raison pour le tribunal de tirer une inférence négative du fait qu'il n'avait pas gardé avec lui un souvenir de Mme Yatema.
[15]
Le défendeur, pour sa part, souligne en premier lieu que l'affidavit du demandeur au soutien de sa demande d'autorisation n'est pas conforme aux
Règles des Cours fédérales
, DORS/98-106 [Règles] puisqu'il est en français et ne contient pas d'assermentation d'un traducteur, tel que requis par le paragraphe 80(2.1) des Règles. Le demandeur avait indiqué dans son FRP qu'il avait besoin des services d'un interprète parlant l'arabe libanais. Le défendeur soumet qu'il est donc raisonnable de penser que le demandeur ne comprend pas bien le français et que son affidavit aurait dû être accompagné de l'assermentation d'un traducteur. Il ajoute que suivant l'alinéa 10(2)
d
) des
Règles des Cours fédérales en matière d'immigration et de protection des réfugiés,
DORS/93-22, le dépôt d'un affidavit au soutien d'une demande d'autorisation fait partie intégrante de celle-ci. Ainsi, le défendeur est d'avis que l'affidavit du demandeur devrait être rejeté par cette Cour ou, subsidiairement, qu'aucune valeur probante ne devrait lui être accordée.
[16]
Quant au caractère raisonnable de la décision du tribunal, le défendeur souligne que la norme de contrôle de la décision raisonnable fait en sorte que cette Cour doit exercer une grande retenue en révisant les conclusions portant sur la crédibilité d'un demandeur. Il ajoute que la décision du tribunal en l'espèce doit être maintenue puisqu'elle est justifiable vu l'absence totale de preuves corroborant les allégations du demandeur. Le défendeur soumet que les arguments soulevés par le demandeur ne suffisent pas pour justifier l'intervention de cette Cour et que le simple désaccord du demandeur avec la décision ne saurait permettre à cette Cour d'intervenir (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[17]
En ce qui a trait aux trois faiblesses contenues dans la preuve du demandeur, le défendeur soumet que les conclusions du tribunal sont raisonnables. Il était loisible au tribunal de tirer une inférence négative du fait que le demandeur ignorait les démarches entreprises par son frère puisque aucune preuve ne corrobore ses allégations et que le demandeur a admis avoir eu des contacts hebdomadaires avec son frère. Dans ces circonstances, il est inconcevable que le demandeur n'ait pas posé de questions sur un point si important à sa demande d'asile.
[18]
Dans le même sens, le défendeur soumet que l'inférence négative tirée par le tribunal en raison de l'absence d'un souvenir de Mme Yatema est raisonnable parce que, au moment de son départ pour le Canada, le demandeur n'était pas au courant de la grossesse de Mme Yatema et qu'il ne faisait face à aucun risque en sol canadien. Cette inférence est donc fondée sur la preuve que possédait le tribunal. Enfin, en ce qui a trait à la confusion entre l'utilisation des mots arabes pour « voisin » et « cousin », le défendeur admet que la distinction est plutôt sémantique, mais souligne que la décision du tribunal n'est pas centrée sur ce point.
Analyse
[19]
En premier lieu, concernant la non-conformité de l'affidavit du demandeur en raison de l'absence d'une attestation d'un traducteur, pour reprendre les mots de ma collègue la juge Judith Snider, « je permettrais que la demande suive son cours en dépit de l'affidavit vicié d[u] demand[eur], mais je rejetterais cette demande sur le fond » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
La seule question en litige est de savoir si la décision du tribunal sur la crédibilité du demandeur est raisonnable. À cet égard, il est bien établi que les questions portant sur la crédibilité relèvent de la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), 160 NR 315 (CAF) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[21]
Comme l'a souligné le défendeur, cette Cour doit faire preuve d'une déférence considérable et exercer une grande retenue en révisant les conclusions d'un tribunal en matière de crédibilité (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).Il ne revient pas à cette Cour de réévaluer la preuve soumise au tribunal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
En l'espèce, je suis d'avis que le tout se résume à un manque de preuves. En vertu de l'article 96 de la LIPR, le demandeur devait démontrer le bien-fondé de sa crainte de persécution, à savoir qu'il possédait, sur la balance des probabilités, une crainte subjective et objective en plus de l'absence de protection de l'État (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). En vertu de l'article 97 de la LIPR, le demandeur devait prouver qu'il faisait face à un risque sérieux d'être soumis à la torture ou à être exposé à une menace à sa vie ou à un risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités. Le demandeur n'a pas satisfait à aucune de ces exigences. D'autant plus, aucun argument avancé par le demandeur ne permet de conclure que la décision du tribunal soit déraisonnable.
[23]
Le premier argument du demandeur vise la réponse dite incomplète citée par le tribunal à la question de savoir ce que son frère avait fait pour obtenir une copie du reportage au sujet du meurtre. Le tribunal énonce qu'il « aurait été raisonnable que le demandeur connaisse les détails concernant ce que son frère a fait pour obtenir une copie du reportage sur le crime d'honneur » étant donné les contacts hebdomadaires qu'il avait avec son frère.
[24]
La transcription pertinente de l'audience se lit ainsi:
Q: [...] Qu'est-ce que votre frère a fait pour essayer d'obtenir une copie de ce reportage, Monsieur?
R: Je lui ai demandé, je lui ai demandé et je ne sais pas comment il a fait, puisque lui il est là-bas à Beyrouth et ça c'est une question qu'on ne peut pas aborder directement comme ça, c'est difficile de parler directement. Alors je sais pas qu'est-ce qu'il a fait.
Q: Qu'est-ce que vous voulez dire, c'est difficile de parler directement?
R: Où il peut, je veux dire où il peut aller poser des questions et demander sur ce reportage pour l'avoir. Il n'a pas des relations, des grosses relations pour pouvoir l'avoir.
Q: OK. Mais je vous demande qu'est-ce qu'il a fait entre vous et votre frère, si vous l'avez discuté, vous dites que vous ne saviez pas qu'est-ce qu'il a fait parce que c'était difficile de lui parler directement.
R: Lui, il peut pas demander des choses comme ça. Avec qui il va parler de ça? Il n'a pas réussi à l'avoir.
Q: OK. Mais je vous demande de savoir qu'est-ce qu'il a fait pour essayer de l'avoir, vous dites que vous ne saviez pas. Et je vous demande pourquoi vous ne saviez pas les détails de ce qu'il a fait pour essayer de trouver ce reportage, étant donné que ce reportage est critique à votre demande d'asile.
R: Quand j'ai parlé avec lui, je lui ai dit tout ce que tu as de preuves concernant cette situation-là, cette histoire-là, mais je veux pas que cette question-là t'expose aux risques, parce que toi tu es mon frère. Si tu peux avoir des choses, s'il te plaît, envoie-les-moi, donne-les-moi.
[25]
Même en étudiant la réponse complète du demandeur, il est clair que ce dernier ne connaît pas les démarches entreprises par son frère. Je partage l'avis du tribunal à savoir qu'il s'agit d'un élément crucial pour sa demande d'asile et le fait de ne pas avoir questionné son frère sur un point si important à sa demande d'asile n'est pas crédible.
[26]
Quant à la confusion des termes « voisin » et « cousin », j'estime qu'il ne s'agit pas d'un élément central à la décision du tribunal et que les preuves lui permettaient de raisonnablement conclure qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une simple question de langue. Dans son FRP, à la question no 31, le demandeur écrit: « Quelques jours plus tard, des membres de sa famille sont venus demander après moi. D'abord, ils ont parlé avec mon cousin puis avec des voisins. »
[27]
Lors de l'audience devant le tribunal, le demandeur a nié toute implication de ses « cousins » et a même affirmé: « Mes cousins n'habitent pas proche de moi. Ce sont les personnes qui habitent à côt [
sic
] ... les cousins n'habitent pas proche de chez nous, ce sont juste des proches de la famille qui habitent à côté de nous, mais pas les cousins ».
[28]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> le tribunal peut tirer des conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité d'un demandeur s'il relève des contradictions ou des incohérences dans son récit ou entre son récit et d'autres éléments de preuve (voir aussi <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ci-dessus;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). En l'espèce, cela est d'autant plus flagrant puisqu'il n'y avait aucune preuve corroborant les allégations du demandeur.
[29]
Quant à l'argument du demandeur selon lequel « le tribunal n'est pas mieux placé que lui pour décider dans des affaires de cœur ce qui est raisonnable ou non », j'estime qu'il y avait suffisamment de preuves devant le tribunal pour lui permettre de tirer plusieurs inférences négatives et en formuler des conclusions raisonnables.
[30]
En somme, l'évaluation de la crédibilité des demandeurs relève de l'expertise spécialisée et exclusive du tribunal et « [c]'est pourquoi notre Cour doit s'abstenir d'intervenir dans cette évaluation à moins qu'elle ne soit arbitraire, abusive ou manifestement déraisonnable » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> citant <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ci-dessus). Tel que j'ai conclu dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
supra
, au paragraphe 42:
[...] le rôle de la Cour est très limité, étant donné que le tribunal a eu l'occasion d'entendre les témoins, d'observer leur comportement et de relever toutes les nuances et contradictions factuelles contenues dans la preuve. Ajoutons à cela que, dans bien des cas, le tribunal possède une expertise reconnue dans le domaine qui fait défaut à la cour de révision. Le tribunal est donc bien mieux placé pour tirer des conclusions quant à la crédibilité, et notamment pour juger de la plausibilité de la preuve. En outre, le principe de l'administration efficace de la justice, sur lequel repose la notion de déférence, fait en sorte que l'examen de ce genre de questions doit demeurer l'exception plutôt que la règle. [...]
[31]
Aucune question de portée générale n'a été soumise par les parties en vertu de l'article 74 de la LIPR et le présent dossier n'en soulève aucune.
Conclusion
[32]
Pour les motifs susmentionnés, la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
JUGEMENT
[33]
LA COUR STATUE que
:
1. La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire visant la décision rendue le 20 mars 2012 par la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié est rejetée.
2. Aucune question de portée générale n'est certifiée.
3. Le tout sans dépens.
[End of document]