 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Jozsef Jeno Horvath and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 670)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Mosley, J.
July 9, 2014.
Counsel:
Joseph Farkas, for the applicants;
Nicholas Dodokin, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Joseph Farkas, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Mosley, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision by a Board Member (Board) of the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) that the applicants are not Convention Refugees or persons in need of protection pursuant to sections 96 and 97 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [
IRPA
]. The following are my reasons for dismissing the application.
I.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The applicants, Mr. Jozsef Jeno Horvath (the principal claimant) and Ms. Timea Blazsovics (the co-claimaint), are common-law spouses and citizens of Hungary. They allege a fear of persecution based on their Roma heritage.
[3]
The applicants allege that they faced discrimination on a daily basis. When the applicants were out in public, people would spit on them and harass them. If they were allowed into stores, security guards would follow them and ask them to empty their pockets. At restaurants or bars, they would be told the restaurant was fully booked or made to wait an extended period of time. Sometimes they would be told that the restaurant or bar did not serve Roma individuals. Their neighbours threatened them, and they witnessed several marches by members of the Hungarian Guards. None of these incidents were reported to the police because the applicants didn't believe that the police would do anything.
[4]
The applicants also allege they faced discrimination with respect to access to employment, health care, education, and housing. In particular, the applicants allege that they both encountered difficulties trying to find permanent employment and that Mr. Horvath was refused entry to a vocational school because of their ethnicity.
[5]
In or around August 2010, the applicants allege that they were leaving their house when three men on the street called them "stinky gypsies" and threatened to kill them if they stayed in Hungary. The applicants asked them why they were yelling about the fact that they were Roma and the men attacked them. Mr. Horvath, who lost consciousness during the assault, was hospitalized. He attended the police station to file a complaint. After waiting a few hours, he was eventually told that the police were busy and that he should come back the following day. He returned the following day to file a complaint, but testified at the hearing that he did not receive any notification in the weeks following the filing of the complaint. He also testified that he did not follow up on the complaint, explaining that he had heard that the police did not investigate complaints filed by Roma individuals.
[6]
In or around September 2010, an armed group attacked the applicants' house yelling "you have too many of you living in this neighbourhood and if you do not move from here, we will kill all Gypsies - starting with you." The applicants escaped through the back gate. Mr. Horvath and his father tried to file a complaint with the police, but the police told them they were making the incident up.
[7]
In or around February 2010, three policemen allegedly detained Mr. Horvath while he was driving his father-in-law's car. The policemen told him that "a lot of Roma are accused of theft" before searching the car and checking the passengers' identification.
II.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[8]
The Board held that the applicants had "not provided the requisite clear and convincing evidence that, on a balance of probabilities, state protection in Hungary is inadequate." Although Mr. Horvath had filed a complaint with the police after the physical assault, the Board noted that Mr. Horvath had not followed up on his complaint. Further, the Board held that in the circumstances of the case, the applicants had not established that they did not need to make reasonable efforts to obtain state protection beyond filing a complaint with the police.
[9]
Upon a thorough and detailed review of the documentary evidence, the Board held that it preferred the documentary evidence that indicated that effective, albeit imperfect, state protection is available to Roma citizens of Hungary. The Board noted that Hungary is a functioning democracy, and acknowledged that while there is evidence that police commit abuses against people, including the Roma, it also demonstrates that it is reasonable to expect authorities to take action in those cases, and that the police and government officials are willing and capable of protecting Roma. Further, there are organizations in place to ensure that the police are held accountable. Thus the Board found that the presumption that adequate state protection was available in Hungary had not been rebutted.
[10]
The Board also reviewed the documentary evidence with respect to the state response to discrimination against Roma to address Mr. Horvath's allegation of potential employers' discrimination. The Board found that while the documentary evidence indicated that Roma face "widespread discrimination" and "exclusion" in Hungary, recourse is available with, amongst other organizations, the Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority Rights (Minorities Ombudsman) as well as with the Equal Treatment Authority, which "has provided individuals with a direct avenue of redress for violations of the prohibition of discrimination in a variety of public and private law relationships."
[11]
On the basis of its findings with respect to state protection, the Board therefore concluded that the applicants were neither Convention refugees nor persons in need of protection. I note that the Board did not make any adverse credibility findings against the applicants.
III.
ISSUES
[12]
The applicant has raised a number of issues relating to the Board's analysis of state protection, persecution and s 97 of the
IRPA
.
[13]
In my view, these issues can be reformulated as follows:
A. Whether the Board's analysis of state protection is reasonable?
B. Whether the Board's analysis of persecution is reasonable?
C. Whether the Board erred by failing to complete a separate s 97 IRPA analysis?
IV.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[14]
The applicant has not provided any submissions on the standard of review. I agree with the respondent who submits that the standard of review for findings on state protection and lack of persecution is reasonableness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
V.
ANALYSIS
A.
ISSUE 1: Is the Board's analysis of state protection reasonable?
[15]
The applicants bore the onus of establishing a fear of persecution. Since Hungary is a functioning democracy, the applicants were required to establish with clear and convincing evidence that the State is unwilling or unable to protect them in a meaningful way:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[16]
Counsel for the applicants cited five decisions of this Court in which judicial review was granted with respect to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Counsel relies on these decisions to argue that this Court should be consistent in its consideration of applications for judicial review relating to the adequacy of state protection. Specifically, Counsel submits that since the Court found in those cases that adequate state protection was not available to Hungarian Roma, the Board's finding of adequate state protection in this case was unreasonable.
[17]
However, as set out by Justice Harrington in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] at para 20:
Each case turns on the particular history of the claimant, the record, the adequacy of the analysis by the Tribunal and, indeed, the appreciation of that evidence by various judges of this  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 393 (QL), at para 4.
[18]
In this case, the Board carefully considered the evidence before it, concluding that the applicants had failed to rebut the presumption of state protection with clear and convincing evidence. The Board accepted the applicants' evidence that they filed a police complaint after the physical assault, and tried to file a complaint after the attack on the house. However, the Board noted that they had failed to follow up with the police with respect to either incident, and rejected their explanation that they had been told the police did not follow up on complaints filed by Roma individuals. The Board also accepted the applicants' evidence that as members of the Roma ethnic minority, they face "exclusion" and "widespread discrimination" in education, employment, housing and access to social services in Hungary. However, the Board held that it preferred the documentary evidence which indicated that adequate albeit imperfect state protection was available. Specifically, the Board concluded, upon a review of the country documentation, that the central government is motivated and willing to implement measures to protect the Roma, and that these measures have proved effective, if imperfect, at the operational level. Furthermore, the Board held that the documentation also indicated that effective recourse is available to Roma individuals and others who are not satisfied with police responses to their complaints. On this basis, the Board held that adequate state protection is available.
[19]
I agree with the respondent that the Board's findings on state protection are factual findings which can only be overturned if the applicant demonstrates that they are capricious, perverse or made without regard to the evidence.
[20]
Justice Gleason recently reviewed the meaning of findings that are "capricious", "perverse" or "made without regard to the evidence" in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[36] In the seminal case interpreting section 18(1)(d) of the FCA,
Rohm & Haas
, Chief Justice Jacket defined "perversity" as "willfully going contrary to the evidence" (at para 6). Thus defined, there will be relatively few decisions that may be characterized as perverse.
[37] The notion of "capriciousness" is somewhat less exacting.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Justice Campbell defined capricious, with reference to a dictionary definition, as meaning "marked or guided by caprice; given to changes of interest or attitude according to whim or fancies; not guided by steady judgment, intent or purpose". To somewhat similar effect, Justice Harrington in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2005] FCJ No 509, defined "capricious" as being "so irregular as to appear to be ungoverned by law". Many decisions hold that inferences based on conjecture are capricious. In
Canada (Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA) at para 33, Justice MacGuigan, writing for the Court, stated as follows regarding conjecture:
The common law has long recognized the difference between reasonable inference and pure conjecture. Lord Macmillan put the distinction this way in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  often a very difficult one to draw. A conjecture may be plausible but it is of no legal value, for its essence is that it is a mere guess. An inference in the legal sense, on the other hand, is a deduction from the evidence, and if it is a reasonable deduction it may have the validity of legal proof. ...
[38] Turning, finally, to the third aspect of section 18.1(4)(d), the case law recognizes that a finding for which there is no evidence before the tribunal will be set aside on review because such a finding is made without regard to the material before the tribunal (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2003] FCJ No 1517). Beyond that, it is difficult to discern a bright-line. The oft-cited
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) [
Cepeda-Gutierez
] provides a useful review of the sorts of errors that might meet the standard of a decision made "without regard to the material" before the tribunal which fall short of findings for which there is no evidence. There, Justice Evans (as he then was) wrote at paragraphs 14 - 17:
... in order to attract judicial intervention under section 18.1(4)(d), the applicant must satisfy the Court, not only that the Board made a palpably erroneous finding of material fact, but also that the finding was made "without regard to the evidence" ...
The Court may infer that the administrative agency under review made the erroneous finding of fact "without regard to the evidence" from the agency's failure to mention in its reasons some evidence before it that was relevant to the finding, and pointed to a different conclusion from that reached by the agency. Just as a court will only defer to an agency's interpretation of its constituent statute if it provides reasons for its conclusion, so
a court will be reluctant to defer to an agency's factual determinations in the absence of express findings, and an analysis of the evidence that shows how the agency reached its result.
[16] On the other hand,
the reasons given by administrative agencies are not to be read hypercritically by a court
[citations omitted]
... nor are agencies required to refer to every piece of evidence that they received that is contrary to their finding, and to explain how they dealt with it
...
That would be far too onerous a burden to impose upon administrative decision-makers who may be struggling with a heavy case-load and inadequate resources. A statement by the agency in its reasons for decision that, in making its findings, it considered all the evidence before it, will often suffice to assure the parties, and a reviewing court, that the agency directed itself to the totality of the evidence when making its findings of fact
.
[17] However, the more important the evidence that is not mentioned specifically and analyzed in the agency's reasons, the more willing a court
may
be to infer from the silence that the agency made an erroneous finding of fact "without regard to the evidence": ... In other words, the agency's burden of explanation increases with the relevance of the evidence in question to the disputed facts. Thus, a blanket statement that the agency has considered all the evidence will not suffice when the evidence omitted from any discussion in the reasons appears squarely to contradict the agency's finding of fact. Moreover, when the agency refers in some detail to evidence supporting its finding, but is silent on evidence pointing to the opposite conclusion, it may be easier to infer that the agency overlooked the contradictory evidence when making its finding of fact.
[emphasis added, citations omitted]
[21]
In my view, the Board's findings on state protection were reasonably open to it on the record before it.
[22]
For this reason, I agree with the respondent that the applicants are seeking to have this Court reweigh the evidence. This is not the Court's role on judicial review:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
B.
ISSUE 2: Whether the Board's analysis of persecution is reasonable?
[23]
Since a finding of adequate state protection is determinative, it is not necessary for me to consider whether the Board erred by failing to find that the discrimination alleged did not amount to persecution.
C.
ISSUE 2: Did the Board err by failing to complete a separate s 97 IRPA analysis?
[24]
The applicant relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] to argue that the Board committed a reviewable error by failing to complete a separate s 97
IRPA
analysis in spite of the negative credibility findings.
[25]
I agree with the respondent that the Board was not required to complete a separate s 97
IRPA
analysis. As noted by the respondent, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> can be distinguished on the basis that the determinative issue in that case was credibility, not state protection. The Board is not required to complete a separate s 97
IRPA
analysis where the determinative issue is state protection, since findings on state protection are equally applicable under s 96 and s 97 of the
IRPA
:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[7] Irrespective of the applicable standard of review, the Board's Decision must stand as, in light of the foregoing authorities, it was not necessary for the Board to conduct a separate section 97 analysis on the facts of this case. This case is analogous to the situations in
Balakumar
,
Brovina
, and
Kaleja
because the findings on state protection applied equally under sections 96 and 97 of IRPA. Accordingly, there was no need for the Board to engage in a separate analysis of whether, but for the availability of state protection, the Applicants would otherwise have qualified as persons in need of protection under section 97 of IRPA.
[26]
The parties proposed no serious questions of general importance and none will be certified.
JUDGMENT
[27]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application is dismissed and no question is certified.
.........................
Jozsef  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Cour est saisie d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire d'une décision par laquelle un commissaire de la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR) a jugé que les demandeurs n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention ni celle de personnes à protéger en vertu des articles 96 et 97 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [la LIPR]. Je rejette la demande pour les motifs exposés ci-après.
I. GENÈSE DE L'INSTANCE
[2]
Les demandeurs, M. Jozsef Jeno Horvath (le demandeur d'asile principal) et Mme Timea Blazsovics (la demandeure d'asile) sont conjoints de fait et citoyens de la Hongrie. Ils affirment craindre la persécution en raison de leur origine rom.
[3]
Les demandeurs allèguent qu'ils subissaient de la discrimination quotidiennement. Quand les demandeurs étaient en public, les gens leur crachaient dessus et les harcelaient. Quand on les laissait entrer dans un magasin, les gardiens de sécurité les suivaient et leur demandaient de vider leurs poches. Dans les restaurants et les bars, on leur disait que le restaurant était complet ou on les faisait attendre très longtemps. Parfois, on leur disait que le restaurant ou le bar ne servait pas les Roms. Leurs voisins les menaçaient et ils ont été témoins de plusieurs marches de membres de la Garde hongroise. Les demandeurs n'ont signalé aucun de ces incidents à la police parce qu'ils estimaient que la police n'agirait pas.
[4]
Les demandeurs allèguent également avoir subi de la discrimination en matière d'accès à l'emploi, aux soins de santé, à l'éducation et aux logements. En particulier, les demandeurs allèguent qu'ils ont tous deux éprouvé de la difficulté à trouver un emploi permanent et que M. Horvath s'est vu refuser l'admission dans une école de formation professionnelle en raison de son origine ethnique.
[5]
Les demandeurs allèguent qu'au mois d'août 2010, ou vers cette date, trois hommes dans la rue les ont traités de [traduction] « sales gitans » au moment où ils quittaient leur résidence et les ont menacés de les tuer s'ils restaient en Hongrie. Les demandeurs ont demandé aux hommes pourquoi ils les injuriaient du fait qu'ils étaient des Roms et les hommes les ont agressés. Monsieur Horvath, qui a perdu connaissance pendant l'agression, a été hospitalisé. Il s'est rendu au poste de police afin de porter plainte. On l'a fait attendre quelques heures, puis on a fini par lui dire que les policiers étaient occupés et qu'il devrait revenir le lendemain. Il s'est présenté de nouveau le lendemain afin de porter plainte, mais a déclaré à l'audience qu'il n'a reçu aucun avis dans les semaines suivant le dépôt de la plainte. Il a également déclaré qu'il n'a fait aucun suivi concernant la plainte en expliquant qu'il avait entendu dire que la police ne faisait aucune enquête se rapportant aux plaintes déposées par des Roms.
[6]
Au mois de septembre 2010, ou vers cette date, un groupe armé a attaqué la résidence des demandeurs en criant [traduction] « trop de gitans comme vous habitent ce quartier et si vous ne partez pas, nous allons vous tuer tous, à commencer par vous ». Les demandeurs ont fui par la porte de la cour arrière. Monsieur Horvath et son père ont tenté de porter plainte à la police, mais les policiers ne les ont pas crus.
[7]
En février 2010, ou vers cette date, trois policiers auraient arrêté M. Horvath pendant qu'il conduisait la voiture de son beau-père. Les policiers lui ont dit que [traduction] « beaucoup de Roms sont accusés de vol » avant de fouiller la voiture et de vérifier l'identité des passagers.
II. DÉCISION FAISANT L'OBJET DU CONTRÔLE
[8]
La Commission a indiqué que les demandeurs n'avaient « pas fourni les éléments de preuve clairs et convaincants nécessaires pour démontrer, selon prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection de l'État est insuffisante en Hongrie ». Monsieur Horvath a porté plainte à la police après l'agression physique, mais la Commission a souligné que M. Horvath n'a fait aucun suivi concernant sa plainte. De plus, la Commission a indiqué que dans le contexte du dossier, les demandeurs n'ont pas établi qu'ils n'avaient pas à faire des efforts raisonnables afin d'obtenir la protection de l'État après avoir déposé une plainte auprès de la police.
[9]
Après avoir effectué un examen approfondi de la preuve documentaire, la Commission a indiqué qu'elle préférait la preuve documentaire selon laquelle une protection de l'État efficace, quoique imparfaite, existait pour les citoyens roms de la Hongrie. La Commission a indiqué que la Hongrie est un pays démocratique et a reconnu que bien qu'il existe des éléments de preuve démontrant que les policiers commettent encore des abus contre certaines personnes, y compris les Roms, la preuve démontre également qu'il est raisonnable de s'attendre à ce que les autorités agissent dans de tels cas, et que les policiers et les représentants du gouvernement veulent protéger les Roms et sont en mesure de le faire. De plus, des organisations ont été mises sur pied afin de veiller à ce que les policiers répondent de leurs actes. Par conséquent, la Commission a conclu que la présomption selon laquelle une protection de l'État suffisante est offerte en Hongrie n'avait pas été réfutée.
[10]
La Commission a également examiné la preuve documentaire se rapportant à la réponse de l'État à la discrimination contre les Roms eu égard à l'allégation de M. Horvath concernant la discrimination éventuelle de la part des employeurs. La Commission a conclu que bien que la preuve documentaire révèle que les Roms sont victimes de « discrimination répandue » et d'« exclusion » en Hongrie, des recours sont possibles auprès de certains autres organismes, dont le commissaire parlementaire aux droits des minorités nationales et ethniques (ombudsman des minorités) et l'Autorité pour l'égalité de traitement, laquelle « offre aux personnes un mécanisme par l'entremise duquel celles-ci peuvent directement demander réparation à l'égard des violations de l'interdiction de discrimination en matière de discrimination commises dans divers contextes relevant du droit privé et public ».
[11]
En s'appuyant sur ses conclusions à l'égard de la protection de l'État, la Commission a donc conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention ni celle de personnes à protéger. Je tiens à faire remarquer que la Commission n'a tiré aucune conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité des demandeurs.
III. QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[12]
Le demandeur a soulevé un certain nombre de questions concernant l'analyse de la Commission sur la protection de l'État, la persécution et l'article 97 de la LIPR.
[13]
Ces questions peuvent à mon avis être formulées comme suit:
A.
L'analyse de la Commission sur la protection de l'État est-elle raisonnable?
B.
L'analyse de la Commission sur la persécution est-elle raisonnable?
C.
La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne se livrant pas à une analyse distincte fondée sur l'article 97 de la LIPR?
IV. NORME DE CONTRÔLE
[14]
Le demandeur n'a fait aucune observation concernant la norme de contrôle. Je conviens avec le défendeur que la norme de contrôle applicable aux conclusions concernant la protection de l'État et l'absence de persécution est celle du caractère raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 16;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
V. ANALYSE
A.
PREMIÈRE QUESTION: L'analyse de la Commission sur la protection de l'État est-elle raisonnable?
[15]
Les demandeurs avaient le fardeau d'établir l'existence d'une crainte de persécution. Comme la Hongrie est une démocratie qui fonctionne, les demandeurs étaient tenus d'établir, en présentant une preuve claire et convaincante, que l'État n'était pas disposé ni apte à les protéger de manière significative:
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689 [
Ward
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[16]
Le conseil des demandeurs a cité cinq jugements où la Cour a fait droit à la demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée par des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Le conseil des demandeurs s'appuie sur ces jugements pour affirmer que la Cour devrait être cohérente dans son examen des demandes de contrôle judiciaire concernant le caractère suffisant de la protection de l'État. Plus particulièrement, le conseil des demandeurs soutient qu'étant donné que la Cour a conclu dans ces affaires que les Roms de Hongrie ne bénéficiaient pas d'une protection de l'État suffisante, il était déraisonnable pour la Commission de conclure que la protection de l'État était suffisante en l'espèce.
[17]
Toutefois, comme l'indique le juge Harrington dans le jugement
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], au paragraphe 20:
Chaque décision dépend de la situation personnelle de la partie demanderesse, de la preuve, du caractère adéquat de l'analyse effectué par le Tribunal et, en fait, de l'appréciation de la preuve par les différents juges de la Cour (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 393 (QL), au paragraphe 4.
[18]
Dans le cas présent, la Commission a examiné attentivement la preuve qui lui a été présentée et a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de la protection de l'État au moyen d'éléments de preuve clairs et convaincants. La Commission a accepté le témoignage des demandeurs selon lequel ils avaient porté plainte à la police après l'agression physique et avaient tenté de porter plainte après l'attaque menée contre leur résidence. Toutefois, la Commission a fait remarquer qu'ils n'avaient fait aucun suivi auprès de la police pour les deux incidents et a rejeté leur explication selon laquelle on leur avait dit que la police ne faisait aucun suivi quand il s'agissait d'une plainte déposée par un Rom. La Commission a également accepté le témoignage des demandeurs selon lequel ceux-ci, en tant que membres de la minorité ethnique des Roms, font l'objet d'« exclusion » et de « discrimination répandue » en ce qui concerne l'éducation, l'emploi, le logement et l'accès aux services sociaux en Hongrie. Toutefois, la Commission a indiqué qu'elle préférait la preuve documentaire selon laquelle une protection de l'État suffisante, quoique imparfaite, était offerte. En particulier, elle a conclu, après avoir examiné les documents relatifs à ce pays, que le gouvernement central est motivé et disposé à mettre en œuvre des mesures visant à protéger les Roms et que ces mesures, quoique imparfaites, sont appliquées sur le terrain. De plus, la Commission a indiqué que selon les documents, les Roms et aux autres personnes insatisfaites des réponses des policiers à la suite de leur plainte disposent de recours. En s'appuyant sur ces conclusions, la Commission a estimé que l'État offrait une protection suffisante.
[19]
Je suis d'accord avec le défendeur pour affirmer que les conclusions de la Commission concernant la protection de l'État sont des conclusions factuelles qui ne peuvent être réfutées que si le demandeur démontre que ces conclusions sont abusives, arbitraires ou tirées sans tenir compte des éléments de preuve.
[20]
La juge Gleason a récemment examiné le sens de conclusions « abusives », « arbitraires » et « tirées sans tenir compte des éléments de preuve » dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 38:
[36] Dans l'arrêt de principe
Rohm & Haas
, portant sur l'interprétation de l'alinéa 18(1)
d
) de la LCF, le juge en chef Jacket a attribué le sens suivant au mot « abusif »: « avoir statué sciemment à l'opposé de la preuve » (au paragraphe 6). Au vu de cette définition, relativement peu de conclusions pourront être jugées abusives.
[37] La définition du mot « arbitraire » est un peu moins contraignante. Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> le juge Campbell indique, en renvoyant à la définition figurant dans le dictionnaire, que le mot « arbitraire » signifie qui dépend du caprice, qui est soumis au libre arbitre ou à la fantaisie et entraîne des changements d'intérêt et d'attitude, et qui n'est pas guidé par un jugement, une intention ou un objectif continu. Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2005] ACF no 509, le juge Harrington va plus ou moins dans le même sens en indiquant que le terme « arbitraire » désigne quelque chose « qui est irrégulier au point de sembler ne pas être conforme au droit ». Le principe qui se dégage de nombreuses décisions est que les conclusions qui sont fondées sur des hypothèses sont arbitraires. Dans l'arrêt
Canada (Ministre de l'Emploi et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), au paragraphe 33, le juge MacGuigan, s'exprimant au nom de la Cour, a formulé les observations suivantes sur les hypothèses:
La différence entre une déduction justifiée et une simple hypothèse est reconnue depuis longtemps en common law. Lord Macmillan fait la distinction suivante dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  distinction entre une hypothèse et une déduction. Une hypothèse peut être plausible mais elle n'a aucune valeur en droit puisqu'il s'agit d'une simple supposition. Par contre, une déduction au sens juridique est une déduction tirée de la preuve et si elle est justifiée, elle pourra avoir une valeur probante. [...]
[38] Pour finir, en ce qui concerne la troisième condition établie par l'alinéa 18.1(4)
d
), la jurisprudence reconnaît qu'une conclusion qui n'est soutenue par aucun élément de preuve sera annulée parce que cette conclusion a été tirée par le tribunal sans tenir compte des éléments dont il disposait (voir, par exemple, l'arrêt
Syndicat des travailleurs et travailleuses des postes c Healy
, 2003 CAF 380, au paragraphe 25, [2003] ACF no 1517). Au-delà de cela, il est difficile d'établir une ligne de démarcation nette.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) [
Cepeda-Gutierrez
], fréquemment cité, contient une analyse utile du genre de conclusions erronées qui pourraient répondre à la norme d'une décision rendue « sans tenir compte des éléments » dont le tribunal disposait, ce qui est fort différent d'une conclusion non étayée par la preuve. Dans cette décision, le juge Evans (maintenant juge à la Cour d'appel fédérale), a écrit, aux paragraphes 14 à 17:
[...] pour justifier l'intervention de la Cour en vertu de l'alinéa 18.1(4)
d
), le demandeur doit convaincre celle-ci, non seulement que la Commission a tiré une conclusion de fait manifestement erronée, mais aussi qu'elle en est venue à cette conclusion « sans tenir compte des éléments dont [elle disposait] » [...]
La Cour peut inférer que l'organisme administratif en cause a tiré la conclusion de fait erronée « sans tenir compte des éléments dont il [disposait] » du fait qu'il n'a pas mentionné dans ses motifs certains éléments de preuve dont il était saisi et qui étaient pertinents pour la conclusion, et en arriver à une conclusion différente de celle de l'organisme. Tout comme un tribunal doit faire preuve de retenue à l'égard de l'interprétation qu'un organisme donne de sa loi constitutive, s'il donne des motifs justifiant les conclusions auxquelles il arrive, de même
un tribunal hésitera à confirmer les conclusions de fait d'un organisme en l'absence de conclusions expresses et d'une analyse de la preuve qui indique comment l'organisme est parvenu à ce résultat.
[16] Par ailleurs,
les motifs donnés par les organismes administratifs ne doivent pas être examinés à la loupe par le tribunal
[renvoi omis] [...]
et il ne faut pas non plus les obliger à faire référence à chaque élément de preuve dont ils sont saisis et qui sont contraires à leurs conclusions de fait, et à expliquer comment ils ont traité ces éléments de preuve
[...]
Imposer une telle obligation aux décideurs administratifs, qui sont peut-être déjà aux prises avec une charge de travail imposante et des ressources inadéquates, constituerait un fardeau beaucoup trop lourd. Une simple déclaration par l'organisme dans ses motifs que, pour en venir à ses conclusions, il a examiné l'ensemble de la preuve dont il était saisi suffit souvent pour assurer aux parties, et au tribunal chargé du contrôle, que l'organisme a analysé l'ensemble de la preuve avant de tirer ses conclusions de fait.
[17] Toutefois, plus la preuve qui n'a pas été mentionnée expressément ni analysée dans les motifs de l'organisme est importante, et plus une cour de justice
sera
disposée à inférer de ce silence que l'organisme a tiré une conclusion de fait erronée « sans tenir compte des éléments dont il [disposait] ». [...] Autrement dit, l'obligation de fournir une explication augmente en fonction de la pertinence de la preuve en question au regard des faits contestés. Ainsi, une déclaration générale affirmant que l'organisme a examiné l'ensemble de la preuve ne suffit pas lorsque les éléments de preuve dont elle n'a pas discuté dans ses motifs semblent carrément contredire sa conclusion. Qui plus est, quand l'organisme fait référence de façon assez détaillée à des éléments de preuve appuyant sa conclusion, mais qu'elle passe sous silence des éléments de preuve qui tendent à prouver le contraire, il peut être plus facile d'inférer que l'organisme n'a pas examiné la preuve contradictoire pour en arriver à sa conclusion de fait.
[Non souligné dans l'original, renvois omis.]
[21]
À mon avis, il était loisible à la Commission de tirer ses conclusions sur la protection de l'État compte tenu de la preuve dont elle disposait.
[22]
Pour ce motif, je suis d'accord avec le défendeur pour dire que les demandeurs veulent que la Cour apprécie de nouveau la preuve. Ce n'est pas le rôle de la Cour dans le cadre d'un contrôle judiciaire:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
B.
DEUXIÈME QUESTION: L'analyse de la Commission de la persécution est-elle raisonnable?
[23]
Comme la conclusion quant au caractère suffisant de la protection de l'État est déterminante, il n'est pas nécessaire que j'examine si la Commission a commis une erreur en ne concluant pas que la discrimination alléguée n'équivaut pas à de la persécution.
C.
TROISIÈME QUESTION: La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne se livrant pas à une analyse distincte fondée sur l'article 97 de la LIPR?
[24]
Le demandeur s'appuie sur le jugement
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], pour affirmer que la Commission a commis une erreur susceptible de contrôle en ne se livrant pas à une analyse distincte fondée sur l'article 97 de la LIPR en dépit des conclusions défavorables qu'elle a tirées quant à la crédibilité.
[25]
Je souscris à l'opinion du défendeur selon laquelle la Commission n'était pas tenue d'effectuer une analyse distincte fondée sur l'article 97 de la LIPR. Comme l'indique le défendeur, une distinction peut être établie entre la présente affaire et le jugement <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> se distingue du fait que la question déterminante dans cette affaire portait sur la crédibilité et non la protection de l'État. La Commission n'est pas tenue d'effectuer une analyse distincte fondée sur l'article 97 de la LIPR si la question déterminante porte sur la protection de l'État, étant donné que les conclusions tirées quant à la protection de l'État sont également valides suivant les articles 96 et 97 de la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[7] Quelle que soit la norme de contrôle applicable, la décision de la Commission ne saurait être modifiée puisque, au vu des précédents susmentionnés, il n'était pas nécessaire que la Commission, dans la présente affaire, effectue une analyse distincte au regard de l'article 97. La présente affaire est assimilable aux décisions
Balakumar
,
Brovina
et
Kaleja
parce que les conclusions sur l'existence d'une protection de l'État étaient valides à la fois aux termes de l'article 96 et aux termes de l'article 97 de la LIPR. Il n'était donc pas nécessaire que la Commission analyse séparément la question de savoir si, n'eût été l'existence d'une protection de l'État, les demandeurs auraient autrement été considérés comme des personnes à protéger au sens de l'article 97 de la LIPR.
[26]
Les parties n'ayant proposé aucune question grave de portée générale, aucune ne sera donc certifiée.
JUGEMENT
[27]
LA COUR STATUE
que la demande est rejetée et qu'aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]