 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perger v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2001), 205 F.T.R. 307 (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2001] F.T.R. TBEd. JN.064 
 
 
 
 Laszlo Perger, Laszlone (Rozalia) Perger, Laszlo Perger (Jr.) and Csilla Perger (applicants) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent) 
 
 (IMM-4733-00, 2001 FCT 551) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Perger v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court of Canada 
 
 Trial Division 
 
 Blais, J. 
 
 May 30, 2001. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Perger family, citizens of Hungary, applied for Convention refugee status. The Immigration and Refugee Board determined that they were not Convention refugees. They applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - The Perger family, parents and two children, applied for Convention refugee status - They claimed a well-founded fear of persecution in their home country (Hungary) on the basis of their ethnicity and membership in a particular social group (Roma) - The Immigration and Refugee Board determined that they were not Convention refugees - They applied for judicial review - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application - Although Mrs. Perger had been attacked in Hungary, the court found no fault with the Board's conclusions that the attack was an isolated event which was not "atrocious or appalling", and that the six year delay between the attack and the family's departure from Hungary was not adequately explained. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - Time for determination of - Mrs. Perger applied for Convention refugee status - She claimed a well-founded fear of persecution in Hungary - The Immigration and Refugee Board examined whether Mrs. Perger had a well-founded fear of persecution at the time she departed from Hungary, and determined that she was not a Convention refugee - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, noted that s. 2(3) of the Immigration Act did not require an applicant to have a well-founded fear of persecution at the time of his departure - It was sufficient that an applicant have an ongoing subjective fear of persecution, and that this fear was well-founded in an objective sense at some point in time - See paragraphs 9 to 18. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, sect. 2(3) [para. 8]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Peter Shen, for the applicants; 
 
 Lori Hendriks, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Peter Shen, Hamilton, Ontario, for the applicants; 
 
 Morris Rosenberg, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on May 22, 2001, in Toronto, Ontario, by Blais, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on May 30, 2001. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Blais, J. 
 : This is an application for judicial review of the Immigration and Refugee Board's (the "Board") decision rendered on August 25, 2000, wherein the Board determined that the applicants were not Convention refugees. 
 
 
 
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicants, Laszlo Perger ("principal applicant"), his wife ("female applicant") and his two children are citizens of Hungary who claim a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of their ethnicity and membership in a particular social group being Roma. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The principal applicant was sent into care of the Children's Aid Services because his parents were unable to cope with so many children in the household. The principal applicant explained that he faced discrimination but survived there because he was young and strong. He faced discrimination in school and at work. He alleged that there were other incidents of discrimination throughout his life. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  After their marriage, the adult applicants decided to go to work in order to support and sustain their family. They faced problems in finding appropriate day care and found one only at the end of two years. That did not last long; the children were sent back home because the authorities complained that the children were unmanageable and were a problem. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The family had faced humiliation and verbal abuse. On July 29, 1993, the female applicant was attacked by three bald men on her way from shopping. She was injured and bloodied all over. The principal applicant treated her for these injuries at home; however, the effect on her was emotional and the medication prescribed by the doctor was not effective. The traumatic effects of the attack were depression, mood swings and a tendency to cry all the time. Unable to work at that stage, the female applicant applied for and was granted a disability pension. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The principal applicant was employed from February 1980 to September 1980 in the construction industry; September 1980 to 1993 as a self-employed contractor in the same construction industry; and from 1993 to August 1999, performed sporadic work. He also mentioned to the Board that sometimes he had lots of work and other times none at all. 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Did the Board err in law in setting out the test for the applicability of subsection 2(3) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 ? 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The definition of Convention refugee is stated as follows in section 2 of the  
 Immigration Act 
 : 
 
 
 
 "'Convention refugee' means any person who 
 
 
 
 (a) by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion, 
 
 
 
 (i) is outside the country of the person's nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country, or 
 
 
 
 (ii) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of the person's former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to return to that country, and 
 
 
 
 (b) has not ceased to be a Convention refugee by virtue of subsection (2), 
 
 
 
 but does not include any person to whom the Convention does not apply pursuant to section E or F of Article 1 thereof, which sections are set out in the schedule to this Act; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(2) A person ceases to be a Convention refugee when 
 
 
 
 (a) the person voluntarily reavails himself of the protection of the country of the person's nationality; 
 
 
 
 (b) the person voluntarily reacquires his nationality; 
 
 
 
 (c) the person acquires a new nationality and enjoys the protection of the country of that new nationality; 
 
 
 
 (d) the person voluntarily re-establishes himself in the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained, by reason of fear of persecution; or 
 
 
 
 (e) the reasons for the person's fear of persecution in the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained, cease to exist. 
 
 
 
 "(3) A person does not cease to be a Convention refugee by virtue of paragraph (2)(e) if the person establishes that there are compelling reasons arising out of any previous persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained, by reason of fear of persecution." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "'réfugié au sens de la Convention' Toute personne: 
 
 
 
 a) qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques: 
 
 
 
 (i) soit se trouve hors du pays don't elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays, 
 
 
 
 (ii) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ou, en raison de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner; 
 
 
 
 b) qui n'a pas perdu son statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention en application du paragraphe (2). 
 
 
 
 Sont exclues de la présente définition les personnes soustraites à l'application de la Convention par les sections E ou F de l'article premier de celle-ci don't le texte est reproduit à l'annexe de la présente loi. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(2) Une personne perd le statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention dans les cas où: 
 
 
 
 a) elle se réclame de nouveau et volontairement de la protection du pays don't elle a la nationalité; 
 
 
 
 b) elle recouvre volontairement sa nationalité; 
 
 
 
 c) elle acquiert une nouvelle nationalité et jouit de la protection du pays de sa nouvelle nationalité; 
 
 
 
 d) elle retourne volontairement s'établir dans le pays qu'elle a quitté ou hors duquel elle est demeurée de crainte d'être persécutée; 
 
 
 
 e) les raisons qui lui faisaient craindre d'être persécutée dans le pays qu'elle a quitté ou hors duquel elle est demeurée ont cessé d'exister. 
 
 
 
 "(3) Une personne ne perd pas le statut de réfugié pour le motif visé à l'alinéa (2)e) si elle établit qu'il existe des raisons impérieuses tenant à des persécutions antérieures de refuser de se réclamer de la protection du pays qu'elle a quitté ou hors duquel elle est demeurée de crainte d'être persécutée." 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  I agree with the applicants that subsection 2(3) of the  
 Immigration Act 
  does not require that an applicant has a well-founded fear of persecution at the time of his departure from his country for subsection 2(3) to apply. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  As was stated in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, in order to establish a well-founded fear of persecution an applicant has to demonstrate that he has a subjective fear of persecution and that this subjective fear is well-founded in an objective sense. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The Supreme Court of Canada explained: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [12] 
  In order for subsection 2(3) of the  
 Immigration Act 
  to apply, a subjective fear is necessary at all times but the objective part of the well-founded fear of persecution is not necessary since if there was a change of circumstances and, as indicated under paragraph 2(2)(e), the reasons for the person's fear of persecution in the country that the person left ceased to exist, the subjective fear is not well-founded in an objective sense anymore. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, Teitelbaum J. explained the test for the application of subsection 2(3) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 : 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 [14] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, Rothstein J. stated: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 [15] 
  However, a claimant has to have had at one time a well-founded fear of persecution or to state it otherwise, has to have been able to satisfy, at one time, the bipartite test stated in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , supra, which is to establish a subjective fear and that the subjective fear is objectively well founded. Therefore, a claimant has to have been able to be considered a Convention refugee at one point in time. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  In the case at bar, the Board considered the attack on the female applicant in 1993 and noted that the applicants did not leave as soon as the incident occurred, although they considered the incident atrocious and appalling. The applicants waited until 1999 to leave. The Board did not accept the principal applicant's explanation for the delay. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The Board considered that the attack on the female applicant was an isolated event and that it did not come under the description of being atrocious or appalling. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Therefore, even if the Board erred in examining whether the female applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution at the time of departure in 1999, the Board's conclusion regarding the delay and the fact that the attack was an isolated event still stands. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  This conclusion demonstrate [sic] that the Board did not accept that the applicants fear of persecution was objectively well-founded regarding the attack since it was an isolated event. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  In any event, the Board's conclusion that the attack did not come under the description of being atrocious or appalling still stands. Since it is a requirement under subsection 2(3) of the  
 Immigration Act 
  that the acts of persecution be found atrocious or appalling, the applicants did not meet the test as stated in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , supra. I cannot find fault with the Board's conclusion. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  Therefore, the Board's mistake in examining whether the female applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution at the time of departure in 1999, is not material and does not warrant this Court's intervention. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  This application for judicial review is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  No question was submitted for certification. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Geoffrey D. Peters/ve 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 




