 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Zeynel Uygur and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 752)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Kane, J.
July 5, 2013.
Counsel:
Clare Crummey, for the applicants;
Jane Stewart, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Waldman & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondents.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Kane, J.
: The applicants seek judicial review pursuant to section 72 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [the
Act
] of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [the Board] made on August 2, 2012, which determined that they were not Convention refugees pursuant to section 96, nor persons in need of protection pursuant to section 97 of the
Act
.
[2]
Ms Ekici and Mr Uygur, mother and son, are citizens of Turkey who arrived in Canada in March 2009 within days of each other, both making a brief stopover in the United States of America. The applicants are Alevi and assert that they were detained several times due to their religious beliefs and their family's political activities, which included taking part in demonstrations. They assert that the family home was raided, and that they were detained by the authorities on several occasions dating back to 2002 and beaten on some occasions. Mr Uygur also claims that he was detained in 2007 and 2008 for distributing political pamphlets and again in January 2009 at which point he was forced to sign a statement indicating that he was involved with illegal groups, which was not true.
[3]
The Board provided a thorough and lengthy decision and, after considering all the evidence and the extensive negative credibility findings, individually and cumulatively, found that on a balance of probabilities the applicants were not being pursued by Turkish authorities as they alleged. The Board accepted that the applicants were Alevi and acknowledged that there was discrimination against Alevis in Turkey. However, based on all the objective country condition evidence, the Board concluded that on a balance of probabilities, the applicants would not face discrimination amounting to persecution, or a risk of harm as a result of being Alevi.
[4]
The Board noted that the applicants' hearing had been adjourned several times to accommodate Ms Ekici's headaches and other illness. The Board refused the applicants' request for an indefinite postponement of their hearing given that the applicants had over two and a half years to prepare for their hearing and despite that the female applicant's headaches had been a long-standing problem, she had not pursued an appointment with a specialist until after the hearing had been scheduled. However, the Board did grant a further adjournment to accommodate the female applicant and, as a result, the hearing took place over five sittings and over a seven month period.
[5]
The Board made several negative credibility findings from the applicants' evidence, including:
• Mr Uygur had said he was not a member of the Pir Sultan Abdal Association but later provided a membership card and other inconsistent information about whether he had one or two of such cards. The membership cards were undated and unsigned;
• Mr Uygur provided inconsistent information about when he became a member of the Pir Sultan Abdal Association, which was either in 2004 or in 1998-99 when he attended with his mother;
• Mr Uygur had limited knowledge of the Pir Sultan Abdal Association and its origins and activities. In addition, he did not have any receipts to support his claim that he had made donations to the group. He also had little knowledge of other Alevi organisations that he had indicated he was involved with;
• Mr Uygur provided vague information about the political pamphlets he had distributed and was unaware of their content;
• Mr Uygur could not provide any details of the demonstrations he attended in Turkey;
• Ms Ekici demonstrated a very limited understanding of what it meant to be Alevi;
• The applicants had not become involved in the Canadian Alevi Association for two years after their arrival, despite their alleged strong support for Alevis in Turkey. Their explanation that it was inconvenient to travel by bus and subway to the association was not accepted by the Board. In addition, they provided inconsistent dates about their membership in the Canadian Alevi Association; and,
• The applicants' oral evidence was that they left Turkey legally. However, Mr Uygur's Personal Information Form [PIF] stated that he used an agent to leave Turkey. Objective evidence indicated that if a person were really wanted by the authorities in Turkey, they would not have been able to leave legally.
[6]
The Board found that the applicants had failed to establish their claims of persecution or political profile, perceived or otherwise, with credible and trustworthy evidence. The applicants had provided contradictory, inconsistent and incomplete evidence, had given evasive and changing testimony at the hearing, and had not provided sufficient corroboration of their claims.
[7]
The Board concluded that the applicants were not Convention refugees as they did not have a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention ground in Turkey. The Board found that they were not persons in need of protection as their removal to Turkey would not subject them to a risk to their lives of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment. The Board also found that there were no substantial grounds to believe that their removal to Turkey will subject them personally to a danger of torture.
Issues
[8]
The applicants submit that the Board's credibility findings were unreasonable. The applicants further submit that the Board failed to take into account the psychological reports which indicated that both applicants, and particularly the female applicant, suffered from memory problems as a result of their persecution in Turkey, which could provide an explanation for some of the credibility findings.
[9]
In addition, the applicant submits that the Board erred by ignoring the PIF of the applicants' daughter and sister, Fatma, which described her mistreatment due to her political activism. Fatma had been granted refugee status in 2007. The applicants' submit that this evidence was corroborative of the applicants' claims.
[10]
The respondent submits that the Board's credibility findings were extensive, justified and are owed deference. The psychologist's reports were considered and cannot be used to bolster credibility, nor do they provide an explanation for the numerous inconsistencies or for the lack of corroboration of the applicants' evidence. The respondent notes that Mr Uygur provided most of the oral testimony and that he did not indicate or exhibit any problems at the time of the hearing. The respondent also submits that the Board did not err by not considering the contents of Fatma's PIF as each claim must be determined on its own merits and the events described in Fatma's PIF would not have sufficiently corroborated the applicants' claims.
Standard of review
[11]
The parties agree that the applicable standard of review is that of reasonableness. The jurisprudence emphasizes that where the standard of reasonableness applies, the role of the Court on judicial review is to determine whether the Board's decision "falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law":
Dunsmuir
at para 47. There may be several reasonable outcomes and "as long as the process and the outcome fit comfortably with the principles of justification, transparency and intelligibility, it is not open to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome":
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 59. The Court will not re-weigh the evidence or substitute any decision it would have made.
[12]
The Board's credibility findings, given its role as trier of fact, warrant significant deference:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] FCJ No 1329 at para 13;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] FCJ No 924 at para 65. In this case, the Board considered numerous inconsistencies, vague and evolving testimony, offered the applicants opportunities to clarify their answers, and observed the applicants and heard their testimony at five sittings.
Do the psychologist's reports provide an explanation for the credibility issues?
[13]
Psychological reports were prepared by Dr Devins for Mr Uygur in November 2010 and for Ms Ekici in June 2011; in other words, a year and six months respectively before the first of the five sittings of the Board. The reports include a
caveat
from Dr Devins for what he indicates may appear to be redundant or repetitive in reports done for refugee claimants, which is that he uses a standard and consistent form of assessment, the results of which are described using consistent and similar terms. While I do not question his credentials, methods, experience or explanation, I observe that the report for Mr Uygur and Ms Ekici is in many respects identical word for word. The findings with respect to each applicant were reported by Dr Devins after a one hour interview - one in November 2010 and the other in June 2011.
[14]
The applicant and respondent both agree that the psychological report cannot be used to support the claims of persecution simply because the same events were communicated to the doctor.
[15]
The applicant submits, however, that the psychological reports provide an explanation for some of the Board's credibility findings. I do not agree.
[16]
The report regarding Ms Ekici indicates that she has headaches for which she takes over-the-counter medication and she has stress related symptoms including problems with concentration and memory. The report also notes that this would be exacerbated under the stress of a refugee hearing. The report also notes that she becomes distracted and forgetful in day-to-day activities (including forgetting names and telephone numbers and misplacing her keys). Exactly the same examples are noted regarding Mr Uygur.
[17]
The psychological report for Mr Uygur was very similar. He also suffers headaches which are treated with over-the-counter medication. Dr Devins noted that his stress-related symptoms include problems with concentration and memory.
[18]
In both reports, Dr Devins notes that "Stress-related cognitive problems can lead to difficulties in providing clear and consistent testimony. Should such problems become evident, it will be important to understand that they likely reflect the disorganizing effects of traumatic stress rather than an effort to evade or obfuscate."
[19]
The Board acknowledged the psychologist's reports and noted that the reports could not be regarded as a "cure-all" for the deficiencies in the testimony. The Board also noted that it was aware of the stress inherent in the hearing process. The Board had repeated several questions to the applicants to provide an opportunity for more clarity. In addition, the applicants had many adjournments to permit Ms Ekici to attend to her headaches and stress. As noted by the respondent, most of the testimony was provided by Mr Uygur, not by Ms Ekici.
[20]
The case law has focussed on whether the Board's consideration of a psychiatric or psychological report is reasonable, and as such, will vary with the particular circumstances.
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] FCJ No 561, a psychiatric report was requested and submitted as a result of incoherent and inconsistent testimony given by Mr Krishnasamy. The Board considered the report and found that it did not provide a satisfactory clarification. Counsel for Mr Krishnasamy also submitted that the psychiatrist's letter could address the overall credibility concerns, including his evasiveness and inconsistency.
[22]
Taking into account the Board's assessment of the evidence, Justice Layden-Stevenson noted the following:
[21] Whether the report was tendered to explain Mr. Krishnasamy's behaviour during the May segment of the hearing, as I believe it was, or whether, arguably, it constituted a means by which to justify his previous testimony is of no consequence because, in my view, the ID Member's treatment of the psychiatric report was not patently unreasonable.
[22]  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  one of the issues was whether the board properly assessed the medical evidence and, in particular, medical reports relating to the applicant's moderate cognitive impairment. The applicant argued that the board erred in its appreciation of two medical reports in the context of its negative assessment of his credibility. In dismissing the applicant's application for judicial review, Chief Justice Lutfy, at paragraphs 13 and 14 stated:
¶ 13 In my view, the member set out her reasons for her negative finding of credibility in clear and unmistakable terms. Her thorough questioning of the applicant on the first day of the hearing to test his ability to participate in the process was precipitated by her earlier review of the medical reports. She allowed the designated representative to assist the claimant during the hearing by repeating questions, when necessary, in more direct and simpler terms. In the two penultimate paragraphs of her decision dealing with the psychiatric and psychological assessments, she found that these medical reports did not affect her negative finding of credibility.
¶ 14 In my view, this conclusion was open to her. She was alert and sensitive to the medical reports prior to and throughout the hearing. She knew the applicant had cognitive challenges. On my review of the transcript, her negative finding of credibility was one she was able to make, even taking into account the medical reports...
[23] These comments are apposite here. The ID Member's reasons, as well as the transcript, reveal that the Member was "alert and sensitive" to the psychiatric report. Moreover, the negative finding of credibility was open to the ID notwithstanding the report. If the ID had failed to consider the report, or had disbelieved its contents, the situation might well be different. However, that is not the case. The Member was aware of Mr. Krishnasamy's diagnosis and did not fail to acknowledge it in the credibility assessment.
The ID Member's determination that the psychiatric report did not provide the better explanation for the inconsistencies and evasiveness in Mr. Krishnasamy's evidence was a determination for the Member to make. The conclusion is neither patently unreasonable, nor unreasonable, in the circumstances. It is settled law that the court's function is not to substitute its opinion for that of the decision maker, even where it might have arrived at a different result.
[My emphasis]
[23]
The issue of psychological reports and their usefulness in addressing credibility findings was raised more recently in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2013] FCJ No 429. At paras 42-45, Justice Noël provides the following comments with respect to the proper approach to be used with this type of evidence:
42
Mr. Pjetri submits that the RPD did not provide any explanation as to whether his psychological situation explains the omissions or lack of detail. This is what was done throughout the decision and specifically at the beginning when the RPD stated that it would usually allow for "more leeway" but that in the circumstances, the contradictions and omission are too obvious to be attributable only to PTSD (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> CarswellNat 969). Although the psychological report indicates that Mr. Pjetri suffers from PTSD, the RPD found that such consideration was not relevant to the inconsistencies noted by the RPD, which is a reasonable determination (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ACWS (3d) 940). Moreover, there was no evidence of memory loss in the case of Mr. Pjetri put before the RPD that could explain the lack of credibility of his story.
43
As for Ms. Vucaj, the RPD did address the content of her psychological report. It specifically referred to it at the beginning of its decision and it was one of the considerations for allowing Ms. Metcalf's assistance at the hearing. The RPD's credibility findings were justified: her inability to provide dates was one of the components of the RPD's reasoning on credibility as a number of other important factors justified an adverse inference as to the credibility of her claim:
1. She did not provide evidence to show that she was hospitalized or documents to explain that it was impossible to retrieve her medical record in Albania.
2. She did not provide a copy of the report prepared by the police while she was at the hospital.
3. She gave contradictory answers with respect to the date she was hospitalized and the period during which she lived with her late husband's family.
4. She gave inconsistent evidence as to who requested the divorce.
44
Although memory problems are listed as one of the symptoms of Ms. Vucaj's psychological condition, it was reasonable for the RPD to determine that it is not a sufficient explanation considering the numerous inconsistencies in her testimony and her failure to provide supporting documents.
45
Furthermore, a reading of the transcript shows that the RPD was alert and sensitive when dealing with both Applicants. The RPD was aware of the state of mind of each Applicant, relied when needed on Ms. Metcalf and was sensitive to the individuals when it questioned them. This sensitive approach allowed the RPD to make an in-depth assessment of the situation, consider the answers given by the Applicants and then make the necessary pertinent credibility findings.
[24]
In the present case, the Board did not err in its assessment of the psychologist's reports. The Board did not ignore the reports, but reasonably found that they did not provide an explanation for the negative credibility findings arising from the testimony of the applicants. The Board's extensive credibility findings, which included the inconsistent and evolving testimony, as well as the inability of the applicants' to provide details of the key aspects of their claims of political persecution, went beyond those that could be attributed to the applicants' stress as exacerbated by the hearing process.
Did the Board err in not considering Fatma's PIF as corroborating evidence?
[25]
The applicants submit that the Board ignored the PIF of their sister and daughter, Fatma, which mentioned that her political activities also involved her mother and brother and that this corroborates the applicant's claims that they were targeted, in part, due to Fatma. I acknowledge that the Board did not refer to this PIF in its reasons.
[26]
The applicants rely on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  83 ACWS (3d) 264 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], noting that although the Board need not refer to each piece of evidence, the more important the evidence, the greater the burden on the Board to consider it.
[27]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Evans noted at paragraph 17:
"... In other words, the agency's burden of explanation increases with the relevance of the evidence in question to the disputed facts. Thus, a blanket statement that the agency has considered all the evidence will not suffice when the evidence omitted from any discussion in the reasons appears squarely to contradict the agency's finding of fact. Moreover, when the agency refers in some detail to evidence supporting its finding, but is silent on evidence pointing to the opposite conclusion, it may be easier to infer that the agency overlooked the contradictory evidence when making its finding of fact. "
[28]
While the applicants submit that this evidence was important and corroborative, it is settled law that refugee claims are to be considered on their own merits. The fact that one applicant is granted refugee status based on a similar experience is not binding on the Board as the Board must assess each claim individually, and previous decisions, even regarding family members, may have been wrongly decided:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] FCJ No 1418 at paras 9 and 10.
[29]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] FCJ No 323, Justice Barnes considered whether the Board had erred by not considering the outcome of earlier refugee hearings of members of the applicants' family. He noted at para 10:
[10] It was forcefully argued on behalf of the Applicants that the Board erred in its analysis of the significance of the claims to protection successfully brought by Ms. Mantilla Cortes' sister and, more recently, by her niece. There is no doubt that the Board declined to take the disposition of these earlier claims into account but the Applicants cited no authority to establish that the Board was under any legal obligation to do so. The Board's approach to this issue is in accordance with the authorities including
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.W.S. (3d) 161, where Justice Yvon Pinard held at paras. 9 and 10:
[9] As for the respondent's submissions, he first criticizes the IRB for failing to analyze the criterion of membership in a particular social group, i.e. the family. According to him, the IRB's analysis did not dispute that he is a member of the Bakary family which, according to the evidence, has suffered persecution: several members of his family have had to seek refuge abroad, and a number of them have been received in Canada as refugees.
[10] In my view, however, a simple reading of the decision discloses that the IRB clearly considered and analyzed the applicant's claim on the basis of his alleged membership in the particular social class of his family.
Moreover, a large number of cases decided by this Court have established that the IRB is not bound by the result in another claim, even if the claim involves a relative, because refugee status is determined on a case by case basis, and because it is possible that the other decision was incorrect
(see, inter alia,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Therefore, in my view, the IRB did not fail to consider the criterion of membership in the particular social group of his family. (My emphasis)
[30]
In the present case, although the Board did not refer to Fatma's PIF, I agree with the respondent that the Board was not required to do so. The fact that the Board previously granted refugee protection for Fatma does not establish a precedent for those with similar claims. Moreover, Fatma's PIF described only one common incident and did not describe the key political activities or beliefs that the applicants allege.
Conclusion
[31]
In the present case, the Board found that the applicants lacked credibility and justified these findings extensively. The information in Fatma's PIF could not have overcome the extensive credibility findings and did not address the primary basis of the applicants' claim of persecution due to their own political involvement, particularly their involvement in the Pir Sultan Abdal Association. The Board found that the evidence of the applicants' involvement in and knowledge of the organization was not credible, nor were their other claims of political activism.
[32]
As noted above, credibility findings of the Board are to be given significant deference. In the present case, the Board noted many credibility issues and its decision clearly states these findings and provides reasons. The Board did not err in failing to consider that the psychologist's reports provided a medical explanation for the applicants' inconsistent testimony. From the medical reports, their behaviour at the hearing, and from the Board's own experience, the Board was aware of the stress on the applicants and took this into account. However, this was not sufficient to address the significant credibility findings and the absence of sufficient corroborative evidence.
[33]
With respect to the applicants' claims of religious persecution due to their Alevi faith, the Board accepted that they were Alevi despite their limited knowledge, but reasonably found on the basis of the objective country condition documents that they would not face persecution for their religious beliefs.
[34]
The application for judicial review is dismissed. No question was proposed for certification.
JUDGMENT
[35] THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed;
2. No question is certified
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeurs sollicitent, conformément à l'article 72 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [la Loi], le contrôle judiciaire de la décision, en date du 2 août 2012, par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié [la Commission] a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention suivant l'article 96 ni celle de personnes à protéger suivant l'article 97 de la Loi.
[2]
Mme Ekici et son fils, M. Uygur, sont des citoyens de la Turquie. Ils sont arrivés au Canada en mars 2009 à quelques jours d'intervalle, après avoir tous deux fait une brève escale aux États-Unis d'Amérique. Les demandeurs sont des alevis et soutiennent qu'ils ont été détenus à plusieurs occasions en raison de leurs croyances religieuses et des activités politiques de leur famille, notamment la participation à des manifestations. Ils affirment que la maison familiale a fait l'objet de descentes et qu'ils ont été détenus par les autorités à plusieurs reprises depuis 2002 et ont à quelques occasions été battus. M. Uygur prétend également qu'il a été détenu en 2007 et en 2008 pour avoir distribué des tracts politiques et à nouveau en janvier 2009, moment où il a été forcé de signer une déclaration indiquant qu'il appartenait à des groupes illégaux, ce qui n'était pas vrai.
[3]
La Commission a rendu une longue décision étoffée et, après avoir pris en compte l'ensemble de la preuve et les nombreuses conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité, de façon individuelle et cumulative, a conclu selon la prépondérance des probabilités que les autorités turques ne poursuivaient pas les demandeurs comme ils l'alléguaient. La Commission a reconnu que les demandeurs étaient des alevis et que ceux-ci faisaient l'objet de discrimination en Turquie. Cependant, compte tenu de l'ensemble de la preuve objective sur la situation du pays, la Commission a conclu, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que les demandeurs ne feraient pas l'objet de discrimination équivalant à de la persécution ni ne seraient exposés à un risque de préjudice du fait qu'ils étaient des alevis.
[4]
La Commission a souligné que l'audience des demandeurs avait été ajournée à plusieurs reprises en raison des maux de tête et autres malaises de Mme Ekici. La Commission a refusé leur demande de report de l'audience à une date indéterminée étant donné que les demandeurs avaient eu plus de deux ans et demi pour se préparer en vue de l'audience. De plus, malgré le fait que les maux de tête de la demanderesse constituaient un problème depuis longtemps, ce n'est qu'après la fixation de la date d'audience qu'elle a demandé un rendez-vous auprès d'un spécialiste. La Commission a cependant accordé un ajournement supplémentaire pour répondre aux besoins de la demanderesse et, ainsi, l'audience, qui a nécessité cinq séances, s'est étalée sur une période de sept mois.
[5]
La Commission a tiré de la preuve présentée par les demandeurs plusieurs conclusions défavorables quant à leur crédibilité, notamment:
• M. Uygur avait dit qu'il n'appartenait pas à l'Association Pir Sultan Abdal, mais il a par la suite fourni une carte de membre et d'autres renseignements contradictoires concernant la question de savoir s'il possédait une ou deux de ces cartes. Les cartes de membre n'étaient ni datées ni signées.
• M. Uygur a fourni des renseignements contradictoires quant au moment où il a adhéré à l'Association Pir Sultan Abdal, à savoir soit en 2004, soit en 1998-1999, lorsqu'il y allait avec sa mère.
• M. Uygur connaissait peu l'Association Pir Sultan Abdal, ses origines et ses activités. De plus, il n'avait aucun reçu pour étayer sa prétention selon laquelle il avait fait des dons au groupe. Il connaissait également très peu les autres organisations alevies auxquelles il avait dit participer.
• M. Uygur a fourni des renseignements vagues à propos des tracts politiques qu'il avait distribués et ne connaissait pas leur contenu.
• M. Uygur ne pouvait fournir aucun détail à propos des manifestations auxquelles il avait participé en Turquie.
• Mme Ekici a montré une très faible compréhension de ce que signifiait être une alevie.
• Ce n'est que deux ans après leur arrivée que les demandeurs ont adhéré à l'association alevie canadienne, même s'ils ont fait valoir qu'ils appuyaient sans réserve les alevis en Turquie. La Commission a rejeté leur explication selon laquelle il était difficile de se rendre en autobus et métro jusqu'à l'association. De plus, ils ont fourni des dates contradictoires à propos de leur adhésion à l'association alevie canadienne.
• Selon le témoignage de vive voix des demandeurs, ils ont quitté la Turquie légalement. Cependant, dans son Formulaire de renseignements personnels [FRP], M. Uygur a déclaré qu'il avait eu recours à un agent pour quitter la Turquie. Des éléments de preuve objectifs ont montré que si une personne était réellement recherchée par les autorités en Turquie, elle n'aurait pas été en mesure de quitter le pays légalement.
[6]
La Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'ont pas établi leurs allégations de persécution ou leur profil politique, perçu ou non, au moyen d'une preuve crédible et digne de foi. Les demandeurs ont fourni des éléments de preuve contradictoires, incohérents et incomplets, ont livré à l'audience un témoignage évasif et changeant, et n'ont pas corroboré leurs prétentions de façon suffisante.
[7]
La Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention et n'avaient pas, suivant un motif prévu à la Convention, raison de craindre d'être persécutés en Turquie. Elle a en outre conclu qu'ils n'avaient pas qualité de personnes à protéger puisque leur renvoi en Turquie ne les exposerait pas à une menace à leur vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités. La Commission a estimé qu'il n'y avait pas de motifs sérieux de croire que le renvoi des demandeurs en Turquie les exposerait personnellement au risque d'être soumis à la torture.
Questions en litige
[8]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que les conclusions de la Commission en matière de crédibilité étaient déraisonnables. Ils font de plus valoir que la Commission a omis de prendre en compte les rapports psychologiques qui indiquent que les deux demandeurs, et plus particulièrement la demanderesse, souffraient de problèmes de mémoire par suite de leur persécution en Turquie, ce qui pouvait expliquer quelques-unes des conclusions quant à la crédibilité.
[9]
En outre, les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur en ignorant le FRP de Fatma (la fille de la demanderesse et sœur du demandeur) dans lequel cette dernière a décrit les mauvais traitements dont elle avait fait l'objet en raison de son activisme politique. Fatma a obtenu l'asile en 2007. Les demandeurs soutiennent que cet élément de preuve corroborait leurs allégations.
[10]
Le défendeur soutient que les conclusions de la Commission quant à la crédibilité étaient exhaustives, justifiées et qu'elles commandent la déférence. Les rapports du psychologue ont été pris en compte et ne peuvent être utilisés pour étayer la crédibilité des demandeurs, pas plus qu'ils ne fournissent une explication pour les nombreuses contradictions ou l'absence de corroboration de la preuve des demandeurs. Le défendeur souligne également que M. Uygur est celui qui a livré la plus grande partie du témoignage de vive voix et qu'il n'a pas indiqué ni exposé quelque problème que ce soit lors de l'audience. Le défendeur fait également valoir que la Commission n'a pas commis d'erreur en ne prenant pas en compte le contenu du FRP de Fatma. En effet, chaque demande d'asile doit être tranchée individuellement et les événements décrits dans le FRP de Fatma n'auraient pas corroboré de façon suffisante les prétentions des demandeurs.
Norme de contrôle
[11]
Les parties reconnaissent que la norme de contrôle applicable en l'espèce est celle de la décision raisonnable. La jurisprudence souligne que lorsque cette norme s'applique, le rôle de la Cour dans le cadre d'un contrôle judiciaire consiste à chercher à savoir si la décision de la Commission « appartient aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
Dunsmuir
, au paragraphe 47). Il peut y avoir plusieurs issues raisonnables et, « si le processus et l'issue en cause cadrent bien avec les principes de justification, de transparence et d'intelligibilité, la cour de révision ne peut y substituer l'issue qui serait à son avis préférable » (
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 59). La Cour n'a pas à apprécier à nouveau la preuve ni à substituer une décision rendue par la Commission.
[12]
Vu le rôle de juge des faits de la Commission, ses conclusions sur la crédibilité commandent une retenue appréciable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACF no 1329, au paragraphe 13;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] ACF no 924, au paragraphe 65). En l'espèce, la Commission a pris en compte de nombreuses contradictions et un témoignage vague et changeant, a offert aux demandeurs des possibilités de clarifier leurs réponses et a pu observer les demandeurs et entendre leur témoignage à l'occasion de cinq séances.
Les rapports du psychologue fournissent-ils une explication en ce qui concerne les problèmes de crédibilité?
[13]
M. Devins, Ph. D., a rédigé le rapport psychologique de M. Uygur en novembre 2010 et celui de Mme Ekici en juin 2011, soit respectivement un an et six mois avant la première des cinq séances de la Commission. Les rapports contiennent un avertissement de M. Devins indiquant que ce qui peut sembler redondant ou répétitif dans les rapports des demandeurs d'asile vient du fait qu'il utilise un formulaire d'évaluation normalisé et uniforme, dont les résultats sont exprimés en des termes uniformes et semblables. Bien que je ne mette pas en cause ses compétences, ses méthodes, son expérience ou son explication, je constate que le rapport de M. Uygur et celui de Mme Ekici sont à plusieurs égards identiques, mot pour mot. Les conclusions des rapports de M. Devins à l'égard de chaque demandeur ont été tirées après une entrevue d'une heure, la première ayant eu lieu en novembre 2010 et la deuxième, en juin 2011.
[14]
Les demandeurs et le défendeur conviennent que le rapport psychologique ne peut être utilisé pour étayer les allégations de persécution simplement parce que les mêmes événements ont été communiqués à M. Devins.
[15]
Les demandeurs font toutefois valoir que les rapports psychologiques offrent une explication à l'égard de certaines conclusions de la Commission quant à la crédibilité. Je ne suis pas d'accord.
[16]
Le rapport concernant Mme Ekici indique qu'elle souffre de maux de tête pour lesquels elle prend un médicament en vente libre et qu'elle est atteinte de symptômes liés au stress, dont des problèmes de concentration et de mémoire. Le rapport indique également que cet état serait exacerbé en raison du stress lié à l'audience relative à la demande d'asile. Le rapport souligne également qu'elle devient distraite et qu'elle oublie des choses lors d'activités courantes (elle oublie notamment des noms et des numéros de téléphone et elle égare ses clés). Exactement les mêmes exemples sont donnés concernant M. Uygur.
[17]
Le rapport psychologique de M. Uygur était très semblable. Il souffre de maux de tête qui sont soignés à l'aide de médicaments en vente libre. M. Devins a indiqué que ses symptômes liés au stress incluaient des problèmes de concentration et de mémoire.
[18]
Dans les deux rapports, M. Devins indique ce qui suit: [traduction] « Des problèmes cognitifs liés au stress peuvent entraîner des difficultés à témoigner de façon claire et cohérente. Si de tels problèmes deviennent évidents, il est important de comprendre qu'ils reflètent probablement la désorganisation causée par le stress traumatique plutôt qu'un effort d'évitement ou de dissimulation. »
[19]
La Commission a mentionné les rapports du psychologue et indique qu'ils ne pouvaient pas être considérés comme étant une « panacée » palliant les lacunes du témoignage. La Commission a également indiqué qu'elle était au courant du stress inhérent au processus d'audience. La Commission a répété plusieurs questions aux demandeurs afin de leur donner la possibilité d'être plus clairs. En outre, les demandeurs ont bénéficié de plusieurs ajournements en raison des maux de tête et du stress de Mme Ekici. Comme le défendeur l'a souligné, M. Uygur, et non Mme Ekici, a livré la plus grande partie du témoignage.
[20]
La jurisprudence met l'accent sur la question de savoir si la prise en compte d'un rapport psychiatrique ou psychologique par la Commission est raisonnable, et la réponse varie donc en fonction des circonstances particulières.
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] ACF no 561, un rapport psychiatrique avait été demandé et présenté à la suite du témoignage incohérent et contradictoire de M. Krishnasamy. La Commission a examiné le rapport et conclu qu'il ne fournissait aucune clarification satisfaisante. L'avocat de M. Krishnasamy a aussi soutenu que la lettre du psychiatre pouvait dissiper l'ensemble des doutes quant à la crédibilité, y compris ses manières évasives et ses contradictions.
[22]
Après avoir pris en compte l'appréciation de la preuve par la Commission, la juge Layden-Stevenson a indiqué ce qui suit:
[21] La question de savoir si le rapport a été remis afin, selon moi, d'expliquer le comportement de M. Krishnasamy durant la partie de l'audience qui a eu lieu en mai ou la question de savoir si, peut-être, il constituait un moyen par lequel on pourrait justifier le témoignage antérieur de M. Krishnasamy était sans conséquence parce que, selon moi, le traitement fait par le membre de la SI du rapport psychiatrique n'était pas manifestement déraisonnable.
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  l'une des questions en litige consistait à savoir si la Commission avait correctement évalué la preuve médicale et, notamment, les rapports médicaux se rapportant à l'affaiblissement léger des facultés cognitives du demandeur. Le demandeur a prétendu que la Commission avait commis une erreur dans son appréciation de deux rapports médicaux dans le contexte de son évaluation défavorable quant à sa crédibilité. En rejetant la demande de contrôle judiciaire du demandeur, le juge en chef Lutfy a déclaré ce qui suit aux paragraphes 13 et 14:
¶ 13 Je considère que la commissaire a exposé les motifs de sa conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité en termes clairs et explicites. Elle a interrogé à fond le demandeur le premier jour d'audience afin d'évaluer sa capacité de participer à la procédure après avoir examiné les dossiers médicaux. Elle a permis au représentant désigné d'aider le demandeur pendant l'audience en répétant les questions en termes plus directs et plus simples lorsque cela était nécessaire. Dans les deux avant-derniers paragraphes de sa décision portant sur les évaluations psychiatriques et psychologiques, elle a indiqué que ces rapports médicaux n'avaient pas influé sur sa conclusion défavorable relative à la crédibilité.
¶ 14 À mon avis, elle pouvait arriver à cette conclusion. Elle s'est montrée réceptive et sensible aux rapports médicaux avant l'audience et pendant toute la durée de celle-ci. Elle savait que le demandeur avait des problèmes cognitifs. J'estime, après avoir examiné la transcription, qu'elle pouvait tirer la conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité à laquelle elle est arrivée, même en tenant compte des rapports médicaux [...]
[23]
Ces commentaires sont utiles en l'espèce. Les motifs du membre de la SI, ainsi que la transcription, révèlent que le membre a été [traduction] « réceptif et sensible » au rapport psychiatrique. De plus, malgré le rapport, la SI pouvait à bon droit tirer la conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité. Si la SI avait omis de tenir compte du rapport ou n'avait pas cru son contenu, la situation serait peut-être différente. Ce n'est toutefois pas le cas. Le membre était au courant du diagnostic concernant M. Krishnasamy et n'a pas omis d'en tenir compte dans l'appréciation de la crédibilité.
La décision du membre de la SI que le rapport psychiatrique ne fournissait pas la meilleure explication quant aux contradictions et quant aux réponses évasives figurant dans le témoignage de M. Khrisnasamy était une décision qu'il incombait au membre de prendre. Dans les circonstances, la conclusion n'est ni manifestement déraisonnable, ni déraisonnable. Il est bien établi en droit que le rôle de la cour ne consiste pas à substituer son opinion à celui de l'instance décisionnelle, même si elle aurait pu arriver à une conclusion différente
. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[23]
La question des rapports psychologiques et leur utilité à l'égard de conclusions quant à la crédibilité a été soulevée plus récemment dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2013] ACF no 429. Aux paragraphes 42 à 45, le juge Noël fait les observations suivantes concernant la démarche appropriée à utiliser avec ce genre de preuve:
42 M. Pjetri soutient que la SPR n'a pas fourni d'explication sur la question de savoir si son état mental expliquait les omissions ou l'absence de détails. Or, elle l'a fait tout au long du processus et plus particulièrement au début, lorsqu'elle a déclaré qu'elle aurait normalement accordé une plus grande « marge de manœuvre », mais que, dans les circonstances, les contradictions et les omissions étaient trop flagrantes pour s'expliquer uniquement par le TSPT (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> CarswellNat 969). Même si le rapport d'évaluation psychologique révèle que M. Pjetri souffre d'un TSPT, la SPR a établi que ce facteur n'avait rien à voir avec les incohérences qu'elle avait constatées, ce qui est une décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 19, 221 ACWS (3d) 940). De plus, dans les arguments de M. Pjetri, aucun élément de preuve relatif à des pertes de mémoire n'a été présenté pour expliquer le manque de crédibilité de sa version des faits.
43 En ce qui concerne Mme Vucaj, la SPR a examiné le contenu de son rapport d'évaluation psychologique. Elle l'a mentionné au début de sa décision, et c'est un facteur qui a été pris en compte pour autoriser Mme Metcalf à les aider à l'audience. Les conclusions de la SPR quant à la crédibilité étaient justifiées: son incapacité de fournir des dates était l'un des éléments du raisonnement de la SPR relatif à la crédibilité, tout comme un certain nombre d'autres facteurs importants étant donné que bon nombre d'entre eux justifiaient l'inférence négative quant à la crédibilité de sa demande:
1. Elle n'a fourni ni des éléments de preuve pour démontrer qu'elle avait été hospitalisée ni des documents pour expliquer qu'il lui était impossible d'obtenir son dossier médical en Albanie.
2. Elle n'a pas fourni de copie du rapport établi par la police au moment où elle était hospitalisée.
3. Elle a donné des réponses contradictoires relativement à sa date d'hospitalisation et à la période au cours de laquelle elle avait vécu avec les membres de la famille de son défunt mari.
4. Elle a livré un témoignage incohérent en ce qui concerne lequel des membres du couple avait demandé le divorce.
44 Même si les problèmes de mémoire sont mentionnés comme un des symptômes de l'état mental de Mme Vucaj, il était raisonnable que la SPR établisse qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une explication suffisante compte tenu des nombreuses incohérences de son témoignage et du défaut de fournir des documents justificatifs.
45 De plus, la lecture de la transcription révèle que la SPR était réceptive et sensible lorsqu'elle traitait avec les deux demandeurs. La SPR était bien au fait de l'état d'esprit de chaque demandeur, s'appuyait au besoin sur Mme Metcalf et faisait preuve d'une grande sensibilité à l'égard des demandeurs lorsqu'elle les interrogeait. Cette approche empreinte de sensibilité a permis à la SPR d'effectuer une évaluation approfondie de la situation, de prendre en compte les réponses fournies par les demandeurs puis de tirer les conclusions nécessaires et pertinentes en matière de crédibilité.
[24]
En l'espèce, la Commission n'a pas commis d'erreur dans son appréciation des rapports du psychologue. Elle n'a pas ignoré les rapports, mais a conclu de façon raisonnable qu'ils n'expliquaient pas les conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité découlant du témoignage des demandeurs. Les nombreuses conclusions défavorables de la Commission en matière de crédibilité, en raison notamment du témoignage contradictoire et changeant des demandeurs et de leur l'incapacité de fournir des détails concernant les aspects clés de leurs allégations de persécution politique, ne pouvaient être seulement imputées au stress des demandeurs exacerbé par le processus d'audience.
La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte du FRP de Fatma à titre de preuve corroborante?
[25]
Les demandeurs font valoir que la Commission a ignoré le FRP de leur sœur ou fille, Fatma, qui mentionnait que sa mère et son frère participaient aussi à ses activités politiques, ce qui corroborait les prétentions des demandeurs voulant qu'ils soient ciblés, en partie, en raison de Fatma. Je reconnais que la Commission n'a pas mentionné ce FRP dans ses motifs.
[26]
Se fondant sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  83 ACWS (3d) 264 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], les demandeurs font valoir que même si la Commission n'est pas tenue de mentionner chaque élément de preuve, plus l'élément de preuve est important, plus l'obligation de la Commission d'en tenir compte est grande.
[27] <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Cepeda
, le juge Evans a déclaré ce qui suit au paragraphe 17:
[...] Autrement dit, l'obligation de fournir une explication augmente en fonction de la pertinence de la preuve en question au regard des faits contestés. Ainsi, une déclaration générale affirmant que l'organisme a examiné l'ensemble de la preuve ne suffit pas lorsque les éléments de preuve dont elle n'a pas discuté dans ses motifs semblent carrément contredire sa conclusion. Qui plus est, quand l'organisme fait référence de façon assez détaillée à des éléments de preuve appuyant sa conclusion, mais qu'elle passe sous silence des éléments de preuve qui tendent à prouver le contraire, il peut être plus facile d'inférer que l'organisme n'a pas examiné la preuve contradictoire pour en arriver à sa conclusion de fait.
[28]
Bien que les demandeurs soutiennent que cet élément de preuve était important et constituait un élément de corroboration, il est établi en droit que les demandes d'asile doivent être jugées selon leur propre bien-fondé. Le fait qu'un demandeur a obtenu l'asile en raison d'une expérience semblable ne lie pas la Commission puisque celle-ci doit apprécier chaque demande individuellement. En outre, des décisions antérieures, même celles concernant des membres de la famille, peuvent être erronées ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] ACF no 1418, aux paragraphes 9 et 10).
[29]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACF no 323, le juge a examiné la question de savoir si la Commission avait commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte de l'issue d'audiences antérieures concernant des demandeurs d'asile qui étaient des membres de la famille des demandeurs. Il a fait remarquer ce qui suit au paragraphe 10:
[10] On a énergiquement fait valoir, au nom des demandeurs, que la Commission avait commis une erreur parce qu'elle avait accordé peu d'importance aux demandes d'asile présentées avec succès par la sœur de Mme Mantilla Cortes et, plus récemment, par sa nièce. Il ne fait aucun doute que la Commission a refusé de tenir compte de l'issue de ces demandes d'asile antérieures, mais les demandeurs n'ont signalé aucun précédent de nature à établir que la Commission devait, en droit, les prendre en compte. L'attitude adoptée ici par la Commission s'accorde avec la jurisprudence, notamment la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.W.S. (3d) 161, où le juge Yvon Pinard écrivait ce qui suit, aux paragraphes 9 et 10:
[9] En ce qui concerne les arguments du demandeur, celui-ci reproche d'abord à la CISR d'avoir omis d'analyser le critère d'appartenance au groupe social que constitue la famille. Selon lui, la CISR, dans son analyse, n'a pas contesté son appartenance à la famille Bakary qui, selon la preuve, a subi la persécution, plusieurs membres de la famille ayant dû se réfugier à l'étranger, plusieurs étant au Canada comme réfugiés reçus.
[10] À mon avis, toutefois, une simple lecture de la décision permet de constater que la CISR a clairement considéré et analysé la revendication du demandeur comme étant basée sur sa prétendue appartenance au groupe social de la famille.
De plus, la jurisprudence de cette Cour a établi dans de très nombreuses décisions que la CISR n'est pas liée par le résultat obtenu dans une autre revendication et ce, même lorsqu'il s'agit d'un parent, puisque la détermination du statut de réfugié se fait cas par cas et qu'il est aussi possible que l'autre décision soit erronée
(voir, entre autres,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1re inst.) ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Je suis donc d'avis que la CISR n'a pas omis de considérer le critère d'appartenance au groupe social de la famille. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[30]
En l'espèce, même si la Commission n'a pas mentionné le FRP de Fatma, je conviens avec le défendeur qu'elle n'était pas tenue de le faire. Le fait que la Commission a auparavant accordé l'asile à Fatma ne crée pas un précédent pour les demandeurs d'asile faisant valoir des allégations semblables. De plus, le FRP de Fatma ne décrivait qu'un seul incident commun et ne décrivait pas les activités ou les croyances politiques clés alléguées par les demandeurs.
Conclusion
[31]
En l'espèce, la Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'étaient pas crédibles et a longuement justifié ses conclusions. Les renseignements contenus dans le FRP de Fatma ne l'emportaient pas sur les nombreuses conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité et ne visaient pas le principal fondement de l'allégation de persécution des demandeurs en raison de leurs propres activités politiques, plus particulièrement leur appartenance à l'Association Pir Sultan Abdal. La Commission a conclu que la participation des demandeurs à l'organisation n'était pas crédible, pas plus que ne l'étaient leurs connaissances concernant celle-ci et leurs autres allégations d'activisme politique.
[32]
Comme il a été mentionné précédemment, les conclusions de la Commission concernant la crédibilité doivent faire l'objet d'une grande retenue. En l'espèce, la Commission a relevé plusieurs problèmes en matière de crédibilité et sa décision énonce clairement ces conclusions et en fournit les motifs. La Commission n'a pas commis d'erreur en n'estimant pas que les rapports du psychologue fournissaient une explication médicale pour le témoignage contradictoire des demandeurs. Compte tenu des rapports médicaux, du comportement des demandeurs à l'audience et de sa propre expérience, la Commission était au courant du stress que vivaient les demandeurs et en a tenu compte. Cela n'était toutefois pas suffisant pour contrer les nombreuses conclusions en matière de crédibilité et l'absence de preuve corroborante suffisante.
[33]
En ce qui concerne les allégations de persécution religieuse des demandeurs du fait de leur foi alevie, la Commission a reconnu qu'ils étaient des alevis malgré leurs connaissances limitées, mais a conclu de façon raisonnable, sur le fondement de documents objectifs sur la situation du pays, qu'ils ne seraient pas exposés à la persécution en raison de leurs croyances religieuses.
[34]
La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification.
JUGEMENT
[35]
LA COUR STATUE
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
2. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]