 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 In the Matter of an application to review and set aside, pursuant to Sections 18(1) and 18.1 of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended, a decision of the Veterans Appeal Board dated the 12th of January, 1994 respecting an appeal under sections 48 and 95 of the Pension Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6 as amended (VAB file  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Attorney General of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Summary: 
 
 Thomas Tonner, a World War II veteran, was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in 1992. He applied to the Canadian Pension Commission for a pension under s. 21(1) of the Pension Act (Can.). Mr. Tonner alleged that exposure, during service between 1941 and 1945, to heavy bombing, toxic fumes, a near-starvation diet, infections, disease and injury contributed to his illness. The Canadian Pension Commission denied the application. Mr. Tonner appealed. 
 
 
 
 The Entitlement Board dismissed the appeal. Mr. Tonner appealed again but died before the appeal was heard. Mrs. Tonner continued the appeal. 
 
 
 
 The Veterans Appeal Board dismissed the appeal. Mrs. Tonner applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Government Programs - Topic 2555 
 
 Veterans' pensions - Entitlement - Appeals - In 1992, a World War II veteran was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) - He applied for a pension and alleged that exposure, between 1941 and 1945, to heavy bombing, toxic fumes, a near-starvation diet, infections, disease and injury contributed to his illness - The application was denied - The Veterans Appeal Board held that it was not satisfied with the evidence of what toxic agents the veteran was exposed to and their relationship to ALS - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, denied judicial review of this decision because the Board had complied with its statutory obligations to draw every reasonable inference in favour of the applicant, accept any uncontradicted evidence that it considered credible and resolve any doubt in favour of the applicant. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 34]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Pension Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6, sect. 21(1) [para. 6]. 
 
 Veterans Appeal Board Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 20, sect. 3, sect. 10(5) [para. 29]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Steve Waller, for the applicant; 
 
 Terrence Joyce, Q.C., for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Nelligan Power, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 George Thomson, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on March, 20, 1995, at Ottawa, Ontario, by Teitelbaum, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on April 7, 1995. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Teitelbaum, J 
 : On April 5, 1994, the applicant, Anne Tonner, filed into the Federal Court Registry an Originating Notice of Motion for the purpose of obtaining, as stated therein: 
 
 
 
 "(a) an order quashing the decision of the Veterans Appeal Board in this matter; 
 
 
 
 "(b) a declaration that the evidence before the Veterans Appeal Board, properly evaluated in accordance with the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
 , required that a pension be granted under section 21 of the  
 Pension Act 
 ; 
 
 
 
 "(c) an order remitting the matter back to the Veterans Appeal Board for a decision in accordance with the declaration referred to in paragraph (b) above. 
 
 
 
 The decision to be reviewed was rendered by a panel of the Veterans Appeal Board and is dated January 12, 1994." 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  It is stated, in the said Originating Notice of Motion, the following: 
 
 
 
 "The decision ruled on an appeal from an earlier decision of an Entitlement Board under the  
 Pension Act 
 . At issue is the entitlement to a pension under section 21(1) of the  
 Pension Act 
 . Section 21(1) creates an entitlement to a pension where the applicant for pension suffers a disability resulting from an injury or disease or an aggravation thereof, that was attributable to, or was incurred during, military service in World War II. 
 
 
 
 "Mr. Thomas Tonner originally applied for the pension at issue with respect to his military service. He died while his appeal to the Veterans Appeal Board was still pending. The applicant herein, as his widow and surviving dependant, continued his appeal in his place, in accordance with section 48 of the  
 Pension Act 
 ." 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The grounds for the said application are: 
 
 
 
 "1. The Veterans Appeal Board erred in law in failing to properly interpret and apply sections 3 and 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
  in its consideration of the evidence with respect to the conditions to which Thomas Tonner had been exposed during military service; and 
 
 
 
 "2. The Veterans Appeal Board erred in law in failing to properly interpret and apply sections 3 and 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
  in its consideration of the medical evidence with respect to the causes of Thomas Tonner's disease, ALS." 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Thomas Tonner was a member of the Royal Canadian Air Force and had active force service from February 28, 1941 to October 27, 1945. He was diagnosed in 1992 as suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) which is also known as "Lou Gehrig's disease". 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  Mr. Tonner died on or about May 25, 1993 leaving a widow, the present applicant. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  On February 21, 1992, Mr. Tonner applied to the Canadian Pension Commission for a pension under s. 21(1) of the  
 Pension Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6 (1st Suppl.) as amended. The application for a pension was based on Mr. Tonner's World War II service in Malta and in what was then known as Palestine. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  On July 16, 1992, Mr. Tonner wrote to Barbara M. Cowal, Senior Pensions Advocate, wherein he describes several conditions to which he had been exposed and which, he believed, might have caused or contributed to his disease, including a near-starvation diet, heavy bombing with resulting exposure to fumes and smoke, severe diphtheria, malaria, trauma in his left shoulder, severe skin disease, ear infection and extensive exposure to fumes from aircraft engines. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  I believe it necessary to reproduce part of Mr. Tonner's July 16, 1992 letter. It should be noted that this letter (Tab 16, Applicant's Record) was written approximately 47 years from the date of Mr. Tonner's discharge. It is also the first time that Mr. Tonner makes reference to having been exposed to toxic chemicals caused as a result of "tremendous bombing". It is also the first time, from the evidence put before me, that Mr. Tonner speaks of having lived and fought "on a diet that was little above starvation level". 
 
 
 
 "I have spoken long distance with two surviving members of my air crew, asking if they could recall any incidents wherein we were exposed to toxic chemicals. In both cases, they recalled with me the tremendous bombing of the Island of Malta with its resultant devastation. A constant cloud of fire and smoke seemed to hang over the island at all times. The water and sewage system was utterly destroyed and there was virtually no sanitation. We bathed in the salt water of the Mediterranean Ocean. 
 
 
 
 "In addition to the bombing there were many hazards in Malta, and many of our people fell victim to them. We lived and fought on a diet that was little above starvation level. Men who were wounded on Operations had to be evacuated since their wounds would not heal on the diet available to them. All types of skin ailments were experienced by most of us, taking many weeks to cure or to remain to torment the sufferer. 
 
 
 
 "On top of all this another reaction set in with an outbreak of Polio and Diphtheria. I considered myself lucky when I entered hospital on April 23, 1943 with severe Diphtheria. Many of my friends were not so fortunate as they battled Polio which killed and crippled many of them. The physical and emotional trauma of all of the above took a heavy toll on me. 
 
 
 
 "Prior to the above, as you will see from the enclosed documents, I was injured as a result of Air Operations on March 31, 1943. Our aircraft was attacked en route to Tripoli and I ended up with Cannon shell splinters lodged in my left shoulder. While my wounds were slight it was another traumatic experience and was followed a month later by my severe Diphtheria. I was treated under the old British Diphtheria treatment which meant three months lying flat on my back in hospital. There was concern about possible heart problems because of the severity of the disease, and I was informed I would have to pass a Command Medical Board if I were to resume flying. Unfortunately, I was stricken in hospital with severe skin disease and infection in my ears causing total loss of hearing. As deafness is sometimes a result of Diphtheria there was great concern about my condition, and I was evacuated from Malta by hospital ship in July 1943. I ended up first in a desert hospital and when no improvement was evident, I was sent to medical specialists at Heliopalis, outside Cairo where my hearing was finally restored and my skin condition improved, with proper diet by September 1943, at which time I was posted to Palestine to resume my career. 
 
 
 
 "As my medical records show I had recurring Malaria from October 1942 right through until December 1944. Those of us who had Malaria in this time period were told that we were some of the first to be treated with a new drug called Atabrine. This was used in conjunction with liquid Quinine administered to us in large doses. 
 
 
 
 "My crew members also pointed out that my position in the aircraft during hundreds of hours of operational flying was immediately adjacent to the port motor. Fumes from this motor constantly permeated my cabin area. The octane levels of aviation fuel at this time may have some accountability for toxic chemical intake. The aircrafts involved in which I flew over 300 hours were Wellington Early Marks. 
 
 
 
 "Since being diagnosed with this devastating disease I have checked my family medical history and find that there is absolutely no record of any motor neuron disease." 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Mr. Tonner's February 21, 1992 application for pension was supported by the statement of Dr. P. Bourque, neurologist. This statement, dated March 30, 1992, states: 
 
 
 
 "MEDICAL STATEMENT 
 
 
 
 THOMAS TONNER	March 30, 1992 
 
 
 
 To Whom it May Concern: 
 
 
 
 RE: THOMAS TONNER 
 
 DOB: 1921/10/12 
 
 84 Beech Avenue 
 
 Deep River 
 
 
 
 I am a Neurologist attached to the Division of Neurology at the Ottawa Civic Hospital, University of Ottawa. I saw Mr. Thomas Tonner during a recent hospitalization at the Ottawa Civic Hospital in February 1992 and again in follow-up on March 17, 1992. 
 
 
 
 Mr. Tonner has very definite Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (a form of motor neuron disease). The diagnosis has been confirmed by clinical examination and EMG evaluation. Conditions which may mimic ALS have been ruled out by the appropriate blood work, myelography, and CSF examination. 
 
 
 
 Mr. Tonner has a history of serving in the military during World Word [sic] II. At one point, he was stationed in Malta. There is a history of acute diphtheria as well as heavy exertion and possible toxic exposure during the military service. Because of previous reports of potential toxic causes for ALS, one could state that his military service may or may not have contributed to this disease. 
 
 
 
 Sincerely yours, 
 
 
 
 Sgd. P. Bourque 
 
 
 
 Pierre R. Bourque, MD, FRCP (C) 
 
 
 
 PRB:reh" 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  What is interesting about this "Medical Statement" is not what it states but what it does not state. Dr. Bourque does not state that  
 he 
  is of the belief that Mr. Tonner's military service "may or may not have contributed to this (ALS) disease". Dr. Bourque speaks in terms of  
 one 
  could state. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  With the utmost of respect, I have difficulty in trying to understand what Dr. Bourque means when he uses the term "one could state" and "may or may not have contributed to this disease". If anything, I can only conclude that he is purposely avoiding giving an opinion. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Commission staff prepared a precis of medical evidence in the records of Mr. Tonner's military service, said precis being dated August 24, 1992. Under the title EXHIBIT 2, 26 Oct. 1945, the following is written: 
 
 
 
 " 
 MEDICAL BOARD PROCEEDINGS ON DISCHARGE: 
 
 
 
 Present Trade 
 : W.O.A.G. (G.L.). 
 
 
 
 Diagnosis 
 : Non-Medical Discharge. 
 
 
 
 Statement of the Veteran Concerning His Own Case 
 : 
 
 
 
 No complaints. 
 
 
 
 History 
 : 
 
 
 
 Pre-Enlistment - Nil. 
 
 
 
 Post Enlistment - 
 
 
 
 1. 12 Nov 42 - 27 Nov 42 - Malaria M.T. 
 
 
 
 2. 25 Apr 43 - 11 June 43 - Diphtheria. 
 
 
 
 4. 24 July/43 - 28 Aug/43 - Otitis Externa. 
 
 
 
 5. 31 Mar/43 Hospital for 5 days. Cannon fragments in shoulder." 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Therefore, from a reading of the above, Mr. Tonner's record confirmed malaria, diphtheria, an ear infection and shoulder wounds. Nothing else. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  On August 24, 1992, a medical opinion (Tab 20, Applicant's Record) was prepared. It concluded that the claimed condition (ALS) is not attributable to Active Force service.  
 
 
 
 "MEDICAL OPINION 
 
 AVIS MEDICAL	24 August 1992 
 
 
 
 RE:  
 Tonner, Thomas Hanna - J.17378 
 
 H.O. File 4746509 
 
 
 
 FIRST APPLICATION RE 
 : 
 
 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
 
 
 
 It is claimed that this condition is attributable to Active Force service. 
 
 
 
 Diagnosis is given by a specialist who saw the veteran first in February 1992. An interview report shows the veteran first experienced symptoms in 1991. 
 
 
 
 There is no record of exposure to, or illness suggestive of exposure to any neurotoxic substance during A.F. service. At discharge October 1945 the veteran gave a history of having malaria in 1942, diphtheria in 1943, and otitis externa in 1943, none of which had caused any residual problem. 
 
 
 
 As noted by the veteran's specialist, there have been suggestions in the research literature on A.L.S. in the past that A.L.S. may possibly be caused by some toxic agent. To date, however, no toxic agent has been found to cause the condition. Despite many studies since the condition was first recognized over 100 years ago, the cause of A.L.S. remains unknown. As noted in the appended review of the literature carried out in October, 1988, there is no evidence that A.L.S. is caused or aggravated by severe exertion, mechanical trauma, an infectious agent, or any toxic chemicals, nor has there been any identification of any causal or aggravating factor since that review was done. Further, in the study 'Is A.L.S. More Common in the Navy' which was initiated by D.N.D. and D.V.A., there was no indication that a common workplace exposure contributed to the development of A.L.S. Specifically, there has never been any evidence to suggest that malaria, diphtheria, or otitis externa play any role in the development of A.L.S. nor has experiencing repeated heavy bombing ever been identified as a causal or aggravating factor. 
 
 
 
 Medical opinion is that the claimed condition is not attributable to A.F. service." 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Of interest are the remarks concerning no record of exposure to or illness suggestive of exposure to any neurotoxic substance during Mr. Tonner's Armed Forces service. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Mr. Tonner's application for pension was denied by the Canadian Pension Commission on August 26, 1992 (see Tab 23, Applicant's Record). 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The medical evidence that the Commission had before it was Dr. Bourque's report dated March 30, 1992 (Tab 15, Applicant's Record) and the medical report (Tab 20, Applicant's Record). Appended to this report was an October 20, 1988 paper, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) (A review of the Recent Literature). Based on the above documentation, the Commission, in its decision, states: 
 
 
 
 "There is no record of exposure to, illness suggestive of exposure to any neurotoxic substance during Active Force Service. At Medical Board proceedings for Discharge in October 1945, the veteran gave a history of having malaria in 1942, diphtheria in 1943, and otitis externa in 1943, none of which had caused any residual problems. 
 
 
 
 "As noted by the veteran's Specialist, there have been suggestions in the research literature on A.L.S. in the past that this condition may be possibly caused by some toxic agent. To date, however, no toxic agent has been found to cause the conditions. Despite many studies since the condition was first recognized over 100 years ago the cause of A.L.S. remains unknown. 
 
 
 
 "As noted in the review carried out in October of 1988, there is no evidence that A.L.S. is caused or aggravated by severe exertion, mechanical trauma, an infectious agent or any toxic chemicals, nor has there been any identification of any causal or aggravating factors since that review was completed. Further, in the study 'Is A.L.S. More Common In The Navy', which was initiated by D.N.D. and D.V.A. There was no indication that a common workplace exposure contributes to the development of A.L.S. 
 
 
 
 "Specifically, there has never been any evidence to suggest that malaria, diphtheria, or otitis externa can play any role in the development of A.L.S., nor has experiencing repeated heavy bombing ever been identified as a causal or aggravating factor. 
 
 
 
 "From the foregoing, it is quite evident that the condition cannot be held as attributable to Active Force Service. 
 
 
 
 " 
 THE COMMISSION RULES: 
 
 
 
 "00629 AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 
 
 
 
 Not attributable to Active Force Service. 
 
 (Subsection 21(1) of the  
 Pension Act 
 ). FIRST DECISION 
 
 
 
 "This claim was adjudicated under subsection 21(1) which provides for entitlement for the injury, disease or aggravation thereof resulting in the disability which was attributable to or was incurred during service in the Active Force. 
 
 
 
 "The Commission or an Entitlement Board is required by section 108 of the  
 Pension Act 
  to accept any uncontradicted evidence presented to it by the applicant that it considers to be credible in the circumstances and to resolve any doubt in the applicant's favour." 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Counsel for the applicant submits that the Commission, in denying Mr. Tonner's application for pension did little more than, as reasons for the denial, repeat the statements of the medical advisor (Tab 20, Applicant's Record) without making reference to previous commissions - Entitlement Board decisions and without assessing the evidence "in light of s. 108 of the  
 Pension Act 
  or s. 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
 , which would govern the Commission, the Entitlement Board and the Veterans Appeal Board in their assessment of the medical evidence". 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  In that it is not, nor could it be, the decision of the Commission or the Entitlement Board that is under review, I need not make any comment with regard to these decisions, except to say that the Commission was aware that any doubt was to be resolved in the applicant's favour. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The Entitlement Board, on November 18, 1992, confirmed the Commission's decision. The Board states (Tab 8, Applicant's Record): 
 
 
 
 "At the outset, the Board Members attention was drawn to page 3 of the Statement of Case where it can be seen that a neurologist has indicated that the claimant was diagnosed with claimed condition in the early part of 1992. 
 
 
 
 "Establishing the basis of the claim, Counsel contended that the veteran has been exposed to toxic chemical during his service in the RCAF, particularly while stationed in Malta. 
 
 
 
 "The following documents were introduced in support of the claim:  
 
 
 
 - copy of a first decision dated 15 October 1984 accepted as exhibit T-2; 
 
 
 
 - copy of an Entitlement Board decision dated 26 April 1990 was accepted as exhibit T-3; 
 
 
 
 - copy of an Entitlement Board decision dated 15 February 1990 was accepted as exhibit T-4; 
 
 
 
 - copy of an Entitlement Board decision dated 11 July 1990 was accepted as exhibit T-5; 
 
 
 
 - a letter from a consulting neurologist addressed to the District Director Advocate Services in Calgary regarding a study 'Is ALS More Common in the Navy?' was accepted as exhibit T-6. 
 
 
 
 "Indicating to the Board Members that exposure to toxic chemicals or metals have been recognized as being causative or have created a doubt in the submitted previous decisions, the veteran has been exposed to some toxic components and in the light of the neurologist's opinion of 30 March 1992, Mr. Marinacci requested entitlement for the claimed condition invoking section 108 of the  
 Pension Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 "The Board has perused all of the evidence contained in the Statement of Case as well as the newly submitted ones. It would like to point out that any of the previous decisions are binding as regards to the adjudication of this particular case. 
 
 
 
 "The Board would like to add as regards to exhibit T-6 that the content of the consulting neurologist's report is based on the theory of cluster as regards to navy personnel and has not put forth a iota of relevant medical evidence supporting this case. 
 
 
 
 "As regards to the neurologist's comments, the Board notes that the neurologist makes reference to previous reports of potential toxic causes for ALS. Such reports were not submitted. 
 
 
 
 "Lastly, in its conclusion, the report has stated: 'his military may or may not contribute to this disease'. 
 
 
 
 "Malaria, diphtheria, heavy bombing, as well as exposure to aircraft engine fumes are not recognized as being causative or as being an aggravating factor in the etiology of the claimed condition. The etiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis being unknown despite the studies since this condition was first recognized over 100 years ago. 
 
 
 
 "Regretfully, the Board has concluded that the claimed condition diagnosed some 47 years after discharge is unrelated to this veteran's period of Active Force service and pension entitlement is therefore not indicated. 
 
 
 
 "This decision was taken with full cognizance of section 108 of the  
 Pension Act 
 ." 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  Mr. Tonner then appealed to the Veterans Appeal Board (VAB) but died on May 25, 1993 before that appeal was heard. The applicant, Anne Tonner, continued the appeal. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The VAB on February 25, 1994, informed the applicant that they "could not render a favourable decision". In the Board's decision, it is stated: 
 
 
 
 " 
 Relevant Provisions of the  
 Act 
 
 
 
 "In order for the Board to award pension entitlement, it must be established that the condition, or aggravation thereof, resulting in disability, is attributable to, or was incurred during, Active Force service in World War II. 
 
 
 
 "In hearing an appeal, the Board is required to draw, from all the circumstances of the case and all of the evidence presented, every reasonable inference in favour of the appellant. It must accept any uncontradicted evidence presented by the appellant, that it considers to be credible, in the circumstances. In weighing the evidence, it shall resolve any doubt, as to whether the appellant has established a case, in favour of the appellant, pursuant to subsection 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
 . The Board is also mindful of its duty pursuant to section 3 to liberally construe and interpret this  
 Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 " 
 Evidence 
 
 
 
 "The Board has reviewed all the evidence which has been presented to it and it is satisfied that the summary of the evidence as is contained in the Entitlement Board decision represents a correct and reliable outline of the evidence in this case save for the item listed separately in the following paragraph. The evidence delineated in the Entitlement Board decision together with the evidence outlined herein will constitute the complete body of evidence on appeal. 
 
 
 
 Exhibit VAB-1 Letter from Dr. M.J. Gawel dated September 29, 1993. 
 
 
 
 " 
 Argument 
 
 
 
 "On behalf of the appellant, the Senior Area Pensions Advocate submits that prior to his death, the late veteran claimed condition among which were trauma, starvation diet, disease and infection, as well as exposure to toxic fumes. He submits further that that in the opinion of a noted neurologist, the multiplicity of factors are such that any one or more may be potential aggravators or initiators of the changes which lead to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and that there is sufficient evidence to create a reasonable doubt which must be resolved in the appellant's favour. 
 
 
 
 " 
 Discussion and Evaluation 
 
 
 
 "In arriving at this decision, this Board has carefully reviewed all the evidence, medical records and the submission presented by the Area Pensions Advocate, and has complied fully with its statutory obligations pursuant to section 3 and subsection 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 "The Board notes that the file contains medical evidence from five separate physicians on the subject of ALS; the Medical Advisor to the Canadian Pension Commission whose Medical Opinion is dated August 24, 1992; a research paper by this Medical Advisor, dated October 20, 1988; a letter from Neurologist Dr. Pierre Bourque dated March 30, 1992; a comment from Dr. Andrew Eisen, Professor of Neurology of the University of British Columbia dated January 17, 1992 and finally the letter dated September 29, 1993 from Consulting Neurologist Dr. M.J. Gawel (Exhibit VAB-1). 
 
 
 
 "In the Medical Opinion, the Medical Advisor to the Commission stated that there is 'no record of exposure to, or illness suggestive of exposure to, any neurotoxic substance during A.F. (Active Force) service.' According to the Medical Advisor, there have been suggestions in the research literature on ALS in the past that the condition may possibly be caused by some toxic agent. 'To date, however, no toxic agent has been found to cause the condition'. The Medical Advisor stated further that 'Despite many studies since the condition was first recognized over 100 years ago, the cause of ALS remains unknown', and 'there is no evidence that ALS is caused or aggravated by severe exertion, mechanical trauma, an infectious agent or any toxic chemicals.' 
 
 
 
 "The Medical Advisor referred to a study called 'Is ALS More Common in the Navy', which was initiated by the Departments of Veterans Affairs and National Defence, and stated that in the study 
 
 
 
 '... there was no indication that a common workplace exposure contributed to the development of ALS ... there has never been any evidence to suggest that malaria, diphtheria or otitis externa play any role in the development of ALS nor has experiencing heavy bombing ever been identified as a causal or aggravating factor ...' 
 
 
 
 "The Medical Advisor was of the opinion that the condition was not attributable to Active Force service. 
 
 
 
 "In her paper, the Medical Advisor reviews the recent literature on ALS and concludes that: 
 
 
 
 '... it is clear from the review of recent research articles that the cause(s) and possible triggering agent(s) responsible for the onset of ALS have yet to be determined ...' 
 
 
 
 "Dr. Pierre R. Bourque is a neurologist attached to the Division of Neurology at the Ottawa Civic Hospital. He confirms in his letter that the late veteran was, in fact, afflicted with ALS and it was his opinion that "one could state that his military service may or may not have contributed to this disease." 
 
 
 
 "In his letter, Dr. Eisen is responding to a copy of the Veterans Affairs/National Defence study on ALS, and addresses his comments to the Bureau of Pensions Advocates in Calgary. In his professional opinion, 'the study, was at best totally equivocal, and is unable to reach any conclusion as to whether or not ALS is indeed more prevalent among members of the Navy'. He stated further that in his opinion 'the study is unable to reach any firm conclusions in relation to the issue i.e. either negative or positive', and 'it adds nothing to what we already knew'. 
 
 
 
 "Dr. Gawel is a consultant neurologist. In his letter to the ALS Society in Ottawa, Dr. Gawel stated that: 
 
 
 
 '... there have been a number of agents that can cause neurotoxicological problems similar to ALS, and in the case of Guamayan ALS, a particular neurotoxin in a cycad (cycas circinalis), has been implicated as a possible cause ...' 
 
 
 
 "According to Dr. Gawel: 
 
 
 
 '... The recent genetic findings in familial ALS of an abnormality in the gene which does for a free radical scavenger, gives further strength to the contention that toxic agents may cause the problem ...' 
 
 
 
 "He stated that while it may be true that there is no evidence that repeated heavy bombing has ever been identified as a causal or aggravating factor, 'there is evidence that trauma to the head or spine is a factor found more often in patients with ALS in a number of case control studies'. 
 
 
 
 "Dr. Gawel pointed out that: 
 
 
 
 '... in a study performed by Dr. Gibberd, who studies servicemen after return from Prisoner of War Camps in the Far East, that ALS and other so-called gender disorders were more common amongst them. The same has been noted in survivors of Concentration Camps ...' 
 
 
 
 "Dr. Gawel mentioned that the late veteran 'survived on a starvation diet for a significant amount of time, and this again is a potential aggravating factor'. It is his opinion that the physical trauma to which the late veteran was exposed during service as well as the dietary privations, 'are potential aggravators or initiators of the changes which lead to the neurodegenerative disorder known as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.' 
 
 
 
 "The medical record contains no entries related to complaints or finding during the period of Active Force service. 
 
 
 
 "The Medical Board Proceedings on discharge report dated October 26, 1945 provides a history of treatment for malaria, November 12 to 27, 1942; diphtheria, April 25 to June 11, 1943; otitis externa July 24 to August 28, 1943 and five-days of hospitalization for cannon fragments in the shoulder, March 31, 1943. 
 
 
 
 "The Board has located no entries on the record related to exposure to toxic agents during the period of service, nor that the late member was nutritionally deprived or that he was treated for or complained of trauma to the head or spine during his period of service. 
 
 
 
 "After heaving carefully studied the available evidence, including the five separate pieces of medical evidence presented, and having considered the submission of the Senior Pensions Advocate, the Board concludes that the evidence does not support this appeal for entitlement. 
 
 
 
 "The only conclusion this Board can draw from the evidence presented is that the cause of ALS is completely unknown and researchers are still trying to determine how the condition is initiated in some individuals and not in others. 
 
 
 
 "It is of the opinion that it would be pure speculation on its part to attribute the claimed condition to Active Force service in the total absence of any description of what agents the veteran was exposed to and credible medical evidence as to their relationship to ALS. 
 
 
 
 "In the circumstances, this Board finds no grounds to disturb the decision of the Entitlement Board." 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  As can be seen from the VAB's decision, it referred to and reviewed all the evidence that was before the Entitlement Board as well as a letter of Dr. M.J. Gawel dated September 29, 1993 (Tab 5, Applicant's Record). 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Dr. Gawel, in his letter states: 
 
 
 
 "I have reviewed the documents sent to me by yourself regarding Mr. Tonner. Mr. Tonner developed Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis with regard to his service in Malta during the war. This condition was diagnosed in the early part 1992. 
 
 
 
 "Having reviewed the documentation, there are a number of factors which in my opinion require further evaluation. I would like first of all to point to the medical opinion dated 24th August, 1992, HO file 4746509, which states that to date no neurotoxication has been found to cause the condition known as ALS, and that the cause of ALS remains unknown. In fact, there have been a number of agents which can cause neurotoxicological problems similar to ALS, and in the case of Guamayan ALS, a particular neurotoxin found in a cycad (cycas circinalis), has been implicated as a possible cause. 
 
 
 
 "The recent genetic findings in familial ALS of an abnormality in the gene which codes for a free radical scavenger, gives further strength to the contention that toxic agents may cause the problem. 
 
 
 
 "In the same report it is stated that there is no evidence that repeated heavy bombing has ever been identified as a causal or aggravating factor. While this may be true, there is evidence that trauma to the head or spine is a factor found more often in patients with ALS in a number of case control studies. 
 
 
 
 "It has been pointed out in a study performed by Dr. Gibberd, who studied servicemen after return from Prisoner of War Camps in the Far East, that ALS and other so called gender disorders were more common amongst them. The same has been noted in survivors of Concentration Camps. 
 
 
 
 "Mr. Tonner survived on a starvation diet for a significant amount of time, and this again is a potential aggravating factor. 
 
 
 
 "Thus, the physical trauma which Mr. Tonner underwent during his service in Malta, as well as the dietary privations, are potential aggravators or initiators of the changes which lead to the neurodegenerative disorder known as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. 
 
 
 
 "In my opinion the case out to be re-examined." 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  In my view, the significant statement found in Dr. Gawel's letter is the statement that "the physical trauma which Mr. Tonner underwent during his service in Malta, as well as the dietary privations,  
 are potential aggravators or initiators 
  of the changes which lead to the neurodegeneration disorder known as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis" (emphasis added). 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  From a reading of the Board's decision, it is apparent that the members of the Board gave consideration to all of the evidence filed. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  With regard to the Board's decision, counsel for the applicant makes the following comments: 
 
 
 
 "24. With respect to the fact of Mr. Tonner's exposure to toxic elements, the Board noted that his service records indicated no such exposure. It did not discuss whether any inferences might be drawn form Mr. Tonner's statements about exposure to smoke and flames from bombing, or exposure to aircraft engine fumes. It made no finding on the credibility of that evidence." 
 
 
 
 Decision of Veterans Appeal Board, 
 
 Tab 3 at 11 and 13 
 
 
 
 "25. With respect to the medical possibility that exposure to toxins might cause or aggravate ALS, the Board quoted, without comment, the medical advisor's opinions that 'to date, no toxic agent has been found to cause' ALS and that 'there is no evidence that ALS is caused or aggravated by ... any toxic chemicals'. It did not address the disparities between the medical officer's opinions and the opinions of the three neurologists, Drs. Bourque, Eisen and Gawel, or consider whether any doubt was raised by such disparities. The Board did not comment on the medical advisor's reliance on the government study on ALS in the navy, even though the applicant had argued that study was irrelevant and was inconclusive as asserted by Dr. Eisen." 
 
 
 
 Decision of Veterans Appeal Board, 
 
 Tab 3, at 12 Submissions of R.C. 
 
 MacLeod, Tab 4, at 19 
 
 
 
 "26. The Board made no comment on previous cases relied on by the applicant, in which pensions had been granted based on medical evidence of a possible link between exposure to toxins and ALS. 
 
 
 
 "27. With respect to Mr. Tonner's assertions of a near-starvation diet, the Board did not find them to lack credibility. It simply noted that the military records did not reveal any entries of such complaints." 
 
 
 
 Decision of Veterans Appeal Board, 
 
 Tab 3, at 13 
 
 
 
 "28. With respect to Dr. Gawel's opinion that a near starvation diet might have caused the ALS, the Board did not make any comment. 
 
 
 
 "29. With respect to Mr. Tonner's complaints of physical trauma, the Board noted that it did not include trauma to the head or spine. It cited but did not make any findings on Dr. Gawel's opinion that Mr. Tonner's physical trauma might have been linked to his ALS." 
 
 
 
 Decision of Veterans Appeal Board, 
 
 Tab 3, at 13 
 
 
 
 "30. The Board concluded by stating that the cause of ALS is completely unknown, and that it would be 'pure speculation' to attribute the ALS to military service 'in the total absence of any description of what agents the veteran was exposed to and credible medical evidence as to their relationship to ALS.'" 
 
 
 
 Decision of Veterans Appeal Board, 
 
 Tab 3 at 13 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  The issues as stated by the applicant are: 
 
 
 
 "31. Did the Veterans Appeal Board err in law by failing to interpret and apply properly, or at all, sections 3 and 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
  in considering the evidence of the conditions to which Thomas Tonner had been exposed during the military service? 
 
 
 
 "32. Did the Veterans Appeal Board err in law by failing to interpret and apply properly, or at all sections 3 and 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
  in considering the medical evidence on the possible causes of Mr. Tonner's disease, A.L.S.?" 
 
 
 
 and, as stated by the respondent: 
 
 
 
 "The issue in this case is whether the Veterans Appeal Board properly applied subsection 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
  in its consideration of the evidence before it, including medical opinions." 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  Section 3 and subs. 10(5) of the  
 Veterans Appeal Board Act 
  provide as follows: 
 
 
 
 "3. The provisions of this Act and of any other Act of Parliament or any regulations thereunder conferring or imposing jurisdiction, powers, duties or functions on the Board shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their country so well and to their dependants may be fulfilled. 
 
 
 
 "10(5) In all appeals to the Board, the Board shall 
 
 
 
 (a) draw from all the circumstances of the case and all the evidence presented to it every reasonable inference in favour of the appellant; 
 
 
 
 (b) accept any uncontradicted evidence presented to it by the appellant  
 that it considers to be credible 
  in the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 and 
 
 
 
 (c) resolve in favour of the appellant any doubt, in the weighing of evidence, as to whether the appellant has established a case." (emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  It is clear from a reading of s. 3 and subs. 10(5) that the Board, in reviewing the evidence before it, shall make all of its decisions, where a doubt exists, in favour of the applicant because of the "recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their country so well". The Board, in reviewing the evidence, draws every  
 reasonable 
  inference in favour of the applicant, accepts any uncontradicted evidence  
 that it considers credible 
  and resolves any doubt in favour of the applicant. 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  I am satisfied, from a reading of the Board's decision, that the Board did exactly what the  
 VAB Act 
  stipulates it must do. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  My reading of s. 3 and subs. 10(5) does not lead me to interpret the sections so as to read that whatever submission is made by a veteran, that submission must automatically be accepted by the members of the VAB. The evidence must be credible and must be reasonable. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  The Board concluded from the evidence before it that Mr. Tonner's illness could not have been reasonably caused as a result of his war effort. The Board was not satisfied with the evidence of what toxic agents Mr. Tonner was exposed to nor was it satisfied with the medical evidence as to the relationship of the agents to ALS. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  The Board gave consideration to the evidence always bearing in mind "its statutory obligations pursuant to s. 3 and subs. 10(5) of the  
 VAB Act 
 ". Clearly, the members of the Board applied the proper "test", that is, that it should find in favour of the applicant if the applicant produced credible evidence that raises at least a reasonable doubt that the fact is true ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  After reviewing this evidence, in detail, the Board, as is its function concluded: 
 
 
 
 "The only conclusion this Board can draw from the evidence presented is that the cause of ALS is completely unknown and researchers are still trying to determine how the condition is initiated in some individuals and not in others. 
 
 
 
 "It is of the opinion that it would be pure speculation on its part to attribute the claimed condition to Active Force service in the total absence of any description of what agents the veteran was exposed to and credible medical evidence as to their relationship to ALS. 
 
 
 
 "In the circumstances, this Board finds no grounds to disturb the decision of the Entitlement Board." 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  It is not for me, on a judicial review to substitute my decision for that of the Board but only to review the evidence to see if the Board applied the proper test, that is interpreted and evaluated all of the evidence and to conclude, if a doubt exists, in favour of the veteran, the applicant in this case. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  I can see no reviewable error. I am satisfied the Board applied the provisions of the  
 Act 
  after reviewing the evidence. 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  I will add that if other Boards, either VAB, or Entitlement Boards or Commissions allowed other ALS claims, this fact in no way binds any other Board or Commission. 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  It is apparent that each case must be decided on its own merits. The medical evidence for each individual is different for each individual and the "combat" circumstances are different. 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  I do agree with the VAB decision with regard to the medical evidence. I am satisfied, as was the Board, that it would be and is pure speculation to conclude that Mr. Tonner's ALS disease was the result of his Active Force service. 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  The application for judicial review is denied. 
 
 
 
 Application denied. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Jean Merlini/sg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



