 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Martha Delia Sandoval Mares, Kevin Antonio Castillo Sandoval and José Angel Catillo Sandoval  (by their Litigation  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 297)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Gagné, J.
March 25, 2013.
Counsel:
Eugenia Cappellaro, for the applicants;
Sophia Karantonis, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Eugenia Cappellaro, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Sophia Karantonis and Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Gagné, J.
: This is an application pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, SC 2001, c 27 [Act], for judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [panel], dated February 21, 2012, which determined that Ms. Sandoval Mares [applicant] and her two minor children, Kevin and José [collectively called the applicants], were not Convention refugees or persons in need of protection as defined in sections 96 and 97 of the Act.
[2]
For the reasons that follow, I have concluded that the Court's intervention is not warranted in this case. The applicants' arguments amount to no more than a disagreement with the panel's credibility findings, and it is not the role of this Court to substitute its own assessment of the evidence to that of the panel. In any event, I find that the panel could reasonably conclude that there was adequate state protection and that the applicants failed to rebut the presumption of state protection in the circumstances.
Facts
[3]
The applicants are citizens of Mexico from Ciudad Juarez in the state of Chihuahua. They arrived in Canada on July 11, 2009 and immediately made a claim for refugee protection. In the applicant's initial Personal Information Form [PIF], submitted in July 2009 in support of her claim, the only stated ground for the refugee claim was the applicant having been a victim of domestic violence at the hands of her former common law spouse, the father of her children. The applicant stated that her former partner was a drug addict and was physically, verbally and sexually abusive towards her throughout their relationship. The applicant also declared to immigration authorities that she was abused and threatened by her former spouse's family in the United States.
[4]
In December 2000, the applicant applied for and was granted a ten-year visa for the United States. However, she stayed in Mexico until May 2007.
[5]
The applicant lived with her former spouse from July 2002 to June 2005 in Mexico. As the applicant stated in her initial PIF, in May 2003 she found out that her husband consumed cocaine on a frequent basis. She also noticed at one occasion in December 2003 that her spouse's sister and her husband arrived with a small luggage in their house and left two bags containing a certain quantity of cocaine. As the applicant questioned her spouse about what he was doing, he became violent and threatened to kill her siblings.
[6]
The applicant left her former partner in June 2005 in order to protect her children from their abusive father and his family, including his brother who has been accused and convicted of child abuse.
[7]
In 2006, the applicant entered into a homosexual relationship with her current partner, an American citizen who then lived in the United States and often travelled to Mexico to visit the applicant. The applicant alleges that as she moved in with her female partner in Juarez, her former partner became increasingly violent and abusive. At one point, he put a gun to her head in front of her children. The applicant fled to the United States on May 22, 2007, leaving her children in Mexico in the care of their maternal grandparents. She lived in California until January 2009.
[8]
In January 2009, she returned to Mexico and applied for a visa to bring her children to the United States, having found out that her parents were allowing her former spouse to see the children. As the applicant's visa application for her children was refused, she decided to travel to Canada to seek refugee protection and her female common law partner joined her in Canada.
[9]
On July 4, 2011, the applicant submitted an amended PIF in which she added two new grounds for her claim, stating that she feared her former spouse not just because of the domestic violence but also because he was involved in organized crime and drug trafficking as a member of Los Aztecas drug cartel in Mexico. The applicant also described her former spouse's family members in the United States as having ties to organized crime and to corrupt police officers in Mexico.
[10]
In addition, the applicant stated in her amended PIF that she was subjected to increased threats of violence by her former spouse, that she was rejected by her own family, and that she suffered harassment due to her lesbian identity. The applicant alleged that her parents disapprove of her being a lesbian and wish her to return to her former partner despite the abuse.
Decision under Review
[11]
The panel conducted a thorough and lengthy analysis of the applicant's various allegations and came to the conclusion that she lacked both a subjective and an objective fear of persecution. The panel considered the determinative issues to be the applicant's lack of credibility with respect to some of her new allegations, the availability of adequate state protection, an internal flight alternative [IFA] in Mexico, as well as the applicant's failure to demonstrate a subjective fear of persecution. As I find the panel's reasons to be comprehensive and reasonable in all respects, I will summarize them in relative detail below.
Adverse credibility findings
[12]
The panel found that the applicant was credible in regard to her identity as a lesbian and as a victim of domestic violence at the hands of her former common law spouse in Mexico. However, the panel found that, on a balance of probabilities, the applicant embellished her allegations to include in her second PIF narrative the allegation that her former spouse and his family were members of Los Aztecas drug cartel and had connections within the police. The panel found that nothing in the evidence demonstrated that the applicant's former partner had a formal affiliation with any drug cartel in Mexico and that had this been the case, the applicant would have undoubtedly mentioned it in her initial narrative.
[13]
The applicant's explanations regarding why she did not state these facts in her initial PIF were not found reasonable or credible by the panel. The applicant notably stated that she did not know how much information to provide as she completed her PIF alone. She also stated that her basic English allowed her to understand the PIF but not the narrative, and that she was told by a translator from the community agency to focus on the information relating to domestic violence. She later mentioned that she did not remember the details of her spouse's association with Los Aztecas at the time she completed her PIF as she had tried to forget everything. The panel found that the applicant offered contradictory explanations for this major omission and was not spontaneous and trustworthy in her oral testimony.
State Protection Analysis
[14]
The panel further found that the applicant's lack of concerted effort to seek any protection from the police or the judiciary at any time throughout the period when she lived with her former spouse, or after her return from the United States, was fatal to her claim. According to her oral testimony, the applicant's former spouse was imprisoned in January 2009, prior to her leaving for Canada, and was released in November 2011. The panel found that since the applicant's former spouse was repeatedly arrested by the police and then released and that the Mexican police and judiciary had demonstrated a willingness to charge and prosecute him in regard to crimes he had committed, the applicant should have sought protection for herself and her children.
[15]
The applicant testified that she did not approach the police because she had witnessed police officers engaged in the drug trade and because she believed police officers to be corrupt. She also stated that she did not seek help at any state agencies, such as women's shelters or legal advisors, because she was ashamed of having been abused. The panel found that the applicant adduced insufficient evidence to rebut the presumption of state protection or establish that the protection was inadequate in her circumstances.
[16]
In view of the relevant documentary evidence, including the Hellman Report ("
Report on Human rights in Mexico
", Judith Adler Hellman), the panel determined that even though some inconsistencies existed among the sources, "the preponderance of the objective evidence regarding current country conditions suggest that, although not perfect, there is effective and adequate protection in Mexico and that Mexico is making serious efforts to address the problem of domestic violence and that police are both willing and able to protect such victims." The panel concluded that according to the jurisprudence, the applicant's subjective reluctance to seek help and her doubts concerning the effectiveness of the protection offered by the state were insufficient to rebut the presumption of state protection.
[17]
The panel noted that the applicant had not taken any legal precautions to ensure that she retains legal custody of her children although she claimed that she feared her former spouse would take the children away from her. The panel further noted that during his non-custodial visits, the children's father never refused to return them to the applicant and never harmed or abused them in any way. He also consented to providing his signature and related authorisation for the purposes of procuring passports for the children to travel outside of Mexico in 2009. The panel found that there was no persuasive evidence upon which it could determine that the children's father or his family had any intention to harm them in the future or that they did so in the past. To conclude, the panel found that, on a balance of probabilities, the minor applicants faced no risk of harm at the hands of their father or his extended family in Mexico.
Persecution versus discrimination
[18]
The applicant alleged that given her identity as a lesbian she faced an increased risk of harm in Mexico. She provided oral evidence regarding discriminatory remarks and actions by her former spouse, her own family or unknown community members in Mexico. The panel found that although the seriousness of such incidents cannot be understated, they do not rise to the level of persecution, as according to section 54 of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status, Geneva, 1992. As per that documentation, alleged differences in treatment or discrimination amount to persecution "if the measures of discrimination will lead to consequences of a substantially prejudicial nature for the person concerned, e.g. serious restrictions on her right to earn a livelihood, her right to practice her religion or her access to normally available education facilities."
[19]
Furthermore, the panel noted that the applicant did not provide any evidence of having endured persecutory practices in her daily life and did not face any restrictions to her rights that would be characterized as persecution.
Internal Flight Alternative
[20]
The panel stated that since the applicant lived in Juarez with her former spouse and that, according to the documentary evidence, homophobic attitudes continue to persist particularly in smaller urban areas in Mexico, the applicant and her children could find a reasonable and accessible IFA in Guadalajara or in Mexico City. The panel stated that the applicant admitted that she and her children could live safely in one of those cities but her partner would not be able to live with them because she has no legal status in Mexico. The panel added that the applicant and her partner could return to California where the applicant's partner previously resided and where, contrary to the applicant's belief, same sex marriage is recognized.
[21]
The two-part test for a finding of an IFA was established by the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA). The onus was on the applicants to show, on a balance of probabilities, that i) there is a serious possibility of persecution in all parts of the country, even in the alleged IFA area, i.e. Guadalajara and Mexico City; and that ii) it would not be unduly harsh for the applicants to relocate to Guadalajara or Mexico City. Both prongs of the test were explored by the panel.
[22]
Applying the first prong of the IFA test, the panel considered the applicant's allegation that she feared her former spouse would be able to find her anywhere in Mexico, with the help of his family or associates, by accessing government databases through their contacts in police and governmental authorities. The panel considered whether it would be possible for criminals to track the applicant through government databases using, for instance, the Voter's Registration Card [VRC] issued by the Mexican Federal Electoral Institute, and came to the conclusion that according to the information found in the objective documentary evidence, the VRC information is confidential and protected by law, and the Board's Research Directorate could not find any concrete example of illegal use by unauthorized parties among sources consulted (National Documentation Package, April 20, 2011, item 3.4 MEX101353.E. 2 June 2006.
Voter's Registration Card (Credencial para votar)
; item 3.6 MEX41642.E. 24 June 2003.
Information on the Clave Unica de Registro de Poblacion (CURP)
; item 14.1 Canada. October 2005.
Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB). Mexico: Selected Issues of Internal Flight Alternatives (July 2003 - July 2005)
). The panel stated that even if the database was vulnerable and not sufficiently protected, nothing indicated that specifically-targeted individuals could be tracked in the system within a reasonable time frame and the current limitations of data processing technology. The panel concluded that, on a balance of probabilities, VRC could not be used by the applicant's former spouse to track her down in Mexico.
[23]
As regards the applicant's homosexuality, the panel found that although discrimination against homosexuals remains a serious issue in Mexico, the government has demonstrated a strong commitment to protect homosexual citizens, and has shown that it can provide them with adequate protection. In addition, the panel noted that there is anti-discrimination legislation in place in Mexico City as well as mechanisms through which the applicant can ensure that her rights as a lesbian are protected (National Documentation Package, April 20, 2011, item 6.1 Reding, Andrew. December 2003. World Policy Institute. "Mexico." Sexual Orientation and Human Rights in the Americas; item 6.3 Global Rights/International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC)/International Human Rights Clinic (IHRC) (Harvard Law School)/Colectivo Binni Laanu A.C. March 2010. Virginia Corrigan.
The Violations of the Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Persons in Mexico: A Shadow Report
; item 6.4 MEX102682.E. 9 January 2008.
Reports of sexual abuse committed by police officers against homosexuals, and against other vulnerable individuals
(2006 - November 2007); item 6.5 MEX103460.FE. 21 April 2010. The panel concluded that on a balance of probabilities, the applicant would not face a serious possibility of persecution due to her sexual orientation in Mexico City, or in the alternative, in Guadalajara.
[24]
Applying the second prong of the IFA test, the panel noted that the applicant expressed no concerns regarding employment and housing or other relocation issues should she return to Mexico with her children, and determined that, on a balance of probabilities, she could find employment in the populous cities of Mexico City and Guadalajara.
Subjective fear analysis
[25]
Lastly, the panel found that the applicant's choice not to make a claim for refugee protection in the United States was inconsistent with a subjective fear of persecution and undermined her various allegations that she feared serious harm in Mexico.
[26]
The applicant offered two explanations for failing to make a refugee claim in the United States. She stated that she did not wish to be legally tied down to another country while her children were in Mexico and further testified that she was unaware that she could file a refugee claim in the United States. The panel rejected both explanations, stating that the applicant had an American common law partner and relatives in the area she lived and worked, and could have reasonably sought consultation about obtaining legal status in that country.
[27]
The panel also noted the applicant left Mexico in 2007 with the assurance that her children would be properly taken care of by her parents. According to her oral testimony, the applicant returned to Mexico in February 2009 when her former partner expressed willingness to take custody of the children, while the documentary evidence showed that the applicant's former partner was imprisoned as of January 2, 2009. The panel there concluded that the applicant's reason to return to Mexico remained unclear but the reason for her failure to seek refugee protection in the United States could not be the fact that her children were in Mexico. The panel further stated that the evidence did not demonstrate any serious possibility of persecution on a Convention ground or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment or danger of being tortured in the proposed IFA area.
Issues and Standard of Review
[28]
The applicant raised the following issues in this application for judicial review:
a. Did the panel err in law in making its credibility findings regarding:
i. the applicant's abuser and his family's association with a drug crime group, and,
ii. the applicant's reasons for returning to Mexico in 2009?
b. Did the panel err in law in making a veiled credibility finding regarding the children's fear of being kidnapped by their father and in doing so, ignored the evidence before it?
c. Did the panel err in law in assessing the applicant's burden to seek state protection and in doing so, misconstrued and ignored the relevant evidence and Guideline 4, Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-related Persecution? [Gender Guidelines] ?
d. Did the member err in law by ignoring evidence in the application of the IFA test?
e. Did the member err in law in misapplying the subjective fear test in relation to the applicant's failure to claim refugee protection in the United States?
[29]
Although the applicant did not specifically address the issue of the appropriate standard of review, the jurisprudence has consistently held that questions of credibility, just like questions as to whether an applicant has rebutted the presumption of state protection and IFA findings, are questions of mixed fact and law, to be reviewed on a standard of reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In reviewing the panel's decision against the standard of reasonableness, the Court considers "the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process" and "whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
Analysis
Did the panel err in law in making its credibility findings?
[30]
The applicant takes issue with a number of credibility findings made by the panel.
[31]
Having carefully read the applicant's initial PIF narrative, it is clear to me that the applicant only referred to her former spouse's drug consumption and described one incident where her sister-in-law arrived at their place with a luggage and presumably left two bags of cocaine. Nothing in the narrative unequivocally indicates that the applicant's former partner or any members of his family were engaged in drug trafficking and there is no mention of them being connected in any way to drug cartels or to organized crime. The panel reasonably found that the applicant's omission was more general than a simple failure to mention the name of the group. It was open to the panel to find that if the applicant's former partner was in a notorious drug cartel, she would have stated it in more explicit terms even if she did not mention the name of the group or other details, especially considering that the applicant did elaborate in some detail on her partner's drug habit. The panel was reasonable in making an overall adverse credibility finding based on the applicant's omission to include an essential aspect of her claim in the initial narrative. As a result, the panel could reasonably reject her explanation that she was told to concentrate on the domestic violence allegations or that her basic knowledge of the English language did not allow her to understand the translated version of her narrative before signing it.
[32]
The applicant takes issue with the panel's finding that her reasons for returning to Mexico in January 2009 were unclear as her former partner was in prison at that time and could not seek custody of the children or try to take them away. The applicant asserts that only after she heard that his former spouse planned to kidnap the children she was told that he was in jail. Besides, she decided to go to Mexico because her former partner was in prison and she left shortly after she heard that he was coming out.
[33]
Again, I cannot agree with the applicant that the panel erred by misstating the evidence. Firstly, the applicant did not state these details in her amended PIF narrative or in her oral testimony. As such, it was open to the panel to make this finding based on the evidence. Secondly, the panel did not base its negative credibility finding on the implausibility of the reason for her travel to Mexico, but exclusively when determining her lack of subjective fear. As a result, even if an error was committed in the assessment of the evidence, it would not be determinative of this application for judicial review (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[34]
The applicant challenges the panel's finding regarding the risk of harm faced by the minor applicants at the hands of their father or his extended family in Mexico. The applicant submits that the panel ignored the evidence regarding the criminal record and the abusive behaviour of the children's father, and made a veiled credibility finding that they did not fear being kidnapped by their father. Furthermore, the applicant argues that because the panel dismissed the children's claim without sound reasons, it also denied the minors a state protection analysis in light of their own circumstances as minors.
[35]
There cannot be finding that a person is a refugee under the Act unless it is demonstrated that that person has subjective fear of persecution or risk of harm and that his or her fear or risk is objectively well-grounded (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Only those risks raised by the refugee claimant will be assessed.
[36]
In the case at bar, no risks were raised as being faced by the minor applicants separate from those faced by their mother. Given that the principal applicant has custody of the children and that their father has had limited visitation rights since their separation in 2005, it is reasonable to find, as the panel did, that the children's subjective and objective fear is closely intertwined with their mother's. It was therefore not an error to address all claims simultaneously and come to what the Court holds to be a reasonable decision regarding the applicant's lack of objective fear. Furthermore, in reaching this conclusion the panel could reasonably rely on the evidence that the presence of the children's father in their lives has never been harmful to them. In addition, the fact that the principal applicant's parents are suspected to be in touch with her former partner is not determinative of their risk insofar as the principal applicant is the custodial parent and can take the required measures to protect her children from the alleged harm.
[37]
Similarly, I find that in assessing the children's subjective fear, the panel could reasonably rely on the testimony of the principal applicant acting as the children's designated representative. As Justice Lagacé stated in
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> where a claimant is not competent, whether by age or disability, and the evidence establishes an objective basis for his fear, the panel should determine whether the designated representative established a subjective fear in his or her role as designated representative and whether the subjective fear be inferred from the evidence. The Court accordingly held that it is not unreasonable or incorrect not to explicitly address the subjective fear of the minor child, as it is open to the panel "to infer the subjective fear of the minor child from the evidence presented, including the testimony of the child's designated representative who was speaking on his behalf."
Did the panel err in law in assessing the applicant's burden to seek state protection and in doing so, misconstrue and ignore the relevant evidence and the Gender Guidelines?
[38]
The applicant submits that the panel erred by ignoring the evidence of lack of state protection in Ciudad Juarez and in the state of Chihuahua, where the applicant lived and where the persecution took place, while there was ample evidence on this location which characterize it as a high-risk area for women.
[39]
I agree with the applicant that as per the principles established in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , "[w] here a tribunal determines the applicant has failed to take steps to seek protection this finding is only fatal to the claim if the tribunal also finds that protection would have been
reasonably forthcoming
. A determination of
reasonably forthcoming
requires that the tribunal examine the unique characteristics of power and influence of the alleged persecutor on the capability and willingness of the state to protect." (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (6)).
[40]
However, the evidence relied upon by the applicant is essentially statistical in nature and lacks context. As a result, I am unable to conclude that this evidence should be considered "relevant, reliable and convincing evidence which satisfies the trier of fact on a balance of probabilities that the state protection is inadequate" in the applicant's specific circumstances (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). It is important to bear in mind that the Court is required to presume that the panel has weighed and considered all of the evidence unless the contrary is shown (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The panel acknowledged that all was not well in Mexico, and that there were conflicting reports as to the effectiveness of existing legislation, and reached a finding that is defensible in respect of the law and the facts of this case.
[41]
Justice Russell reached a similar conclusion regarding analogous statistical evidence of lack of state protection invoked by the applicants in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> where he wrote:
Refugee protection is available to those at risk who can establish a nexus to a Convention ground. Protection is also available to those who face a personalized risk of harm in their home country. In either circumstance, the home state must be either unwilling or unable to protect its own citizens before international protection is engaged. In the present case, the state is not the agent of persecution and the Applicants, who have lived in the USA for a considerable time, did not approach the authorities in El Salvador in a meaningful way to ask for protection against those who would cause them harm.
A high homicide rate in El Salvador tells us nothing about what the state can and/or will do if approached by the Applicants for protection. In order to have any relevance, in my view, the statistics would have to show what happens to those whose lives are threatened and who approach the state and ask for protection. The general homicide rate, which will include those people murdered for non-Convention reasons, as well as people who never seek protection, tells us little about the case at hand. Homicides may be epidemic in El Salvador and the authorities may be finding it difficult to improve the figures, but this does not mean they cannot or will not protect potential refugees who ask for protection.
The RPD looked at the evidence and concluded that, if the authorities are approached and asked for protection in El Salvador, they can and will provide adequate protection. Reliance upon general homicide statistics does not really go to this issue and the RPD's failure to specifically address those statistics does not render the Decision unreasonable. Homicide rates vary considerably around the world. They are not in themselves a measure of the extent to which a state is willing or able to protect those who could seek protection from persecution under section 96, or are at risk under section 97, of the Act if given the opportunity to do so. Protection requires communication from, and the cooperation of, the person who feels at risk. In the present case, the Applicants' cooperation was not forthcoming.
[42]
Furthermore, I find that the panel's findings regarding the applicant's complete failure to seek any kind of protection in Mexico do not display a lack of the sensitivity or the contextualization called for by the Gender Guidelines or the Supreme Court's decision in R v Lavallee, [1990] 1 SCR 852.
[43]
The Court is mindful of the importance of clearly applying the Gender Guidelines and the necessity for the panel to carefully, knowledgeably, and understandingly assess what actions can be realistically expected of a woman who has suffered violence (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). However, the applicant raised no specific issues or findings of fact, and I find none, that would demonstrate a lack of understanding or sensitivity on the panel's part. As Justice Layden-Stevenson pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "the gender guidelines do not necessarily absolve applicants from seeking the protection of the state." In absence of any specific allegations demonstrating a misapplication of the Gender Guidelines, I find that the panel's finding is reasonable and sufficiently supported by the evidence that the applicant did not seek protection in Mexico at any point of time. She even failed to take legal precautions to ensure that she retains legal custody of the children although she allegedly feared her former spouse might take them away from her.
[44]
It is well established that a reasonable finding of adequate state protection is fatal to claims under both sections 96 and 97 of the Act. Consequently, the impugned decision must stand (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[45]
No question of general importance has been proposed for certification by counsel and none will be certified.
JUDGMENT
[46]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
a. This application for judicial review is dismissed.
b. No question of general importance is certified.
.........................
Martha Delia Sandoval Mares, Kevin Antonio Castillo Sandoval et José Angel Catillo Sandoval (représentés par leur tutrice à l'instance,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire déposée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la Loi), à l'égard de la décision datée du 21 février 2012 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada (le tribunal) a conclu que Mme Sandoval Mares (la demanderesse) et ses deux enfants mineurs, Kevin et José (collectivement, les demandeurs), n'avaient pas la qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention ni de personnes à protéger au sens des articles 96 et 97 de la Loi.
[2]
Pour les motifs énoncés ci-dessous, je conclus que l'intervention de la Cour n'est pas justifiée en l'espèce. Essentiellement, la position des demandeurs se résume à une opposition aux conclusions du tribunal au sujet de la crédibilité. Le rôle de la Cour n'est pas de substituer son appréciation de la preuve à celle du tribunal. De toute manière, je conclus que le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement conclure qu'il existe une protection suffisante de l'État et que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réussi à réfuter la présomption de l'existence d'une telle présomption dans les circonstances.
Les faits
[3]
Les demandeurs sont citoyens du Mexique. Ils viennent de l'État de Chihuahua. Ils sont arrivés au Canada le 11 juillet 2009 et ils ont immédiatement présenté une demande d'asile. Dans le formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) que la demanderesse a présenté en juillet 2009 à l'appui de sa demande d'asile, le seul fondement invoqué pour demander l'asile est que la demanderesse avait été victime de violence conjugale de la part de son ancien conjoint de fait, le père de ses enfants. La demanderesse a déclaré que son ancien conjoint était toxicomane et qu'il lui avait infligé des violences physiques, verbales et sexuelles tout au long de leur relation. Elle a aussi déclaré aux autorités de l'immigration qu'elle avait été agressée et menacée par des membres de la famille de son ancien conjoint aux États-Unis.
[4]
En décembre 2000, la demanderesse a demandé et obtenu un visa de dix ans pour les États-Unis. Cependant, elle est restée au Mexique jusqu'en mai 2007.
[5]
De juillet 2002 à juin 2005, la demanderesse a vécu avec son ancien conjoint au Mexique. Selon ce qu'elle a déclaré dans son FRP initial, la demanderesse avait découvert en mai 2003 que son conjoint consommait fréquemment de la cocaïne. De plus, à une occasion, en décembre 2003, elle a aperçu son conjoint et la sœur de ce dernier arriver chez eux avec une petite valise et y laisser deux sacs contenant une certaine quantité de cocaïne. Lorsque la demanderesse a posé des questions à son conjoint sur ce qu'il faisait, il est devenu violent et a menacé de tuer les frères et sœurs de la demanderesse.
[6]
La demanderesse a quitté son ancien conjoint en juin 2005, afin de protéger ses enfants de leur père violent et de la famille de ce dernier, notamment son frère, qui avait été accusé et déclaré coupable d'agression sur un enfant.
[7]
En 2006, la demanderesse a commencé une relation homosexuelle avec sa conjointe actuelle, une citoyenne américaine qui vivait alors aux États-Unis et qui se rendait souvent au Mexique pour visiter la demanderesse. La demanderesse soutient qu'à compter du moment où elle a emménagé avec sa conjointe à Juárez, son ancien conjoint est devenu de plus en plus agressif et violent. Un jour, il lui appuyé un fusil sur la tête de la demanderesse devant ses enfants. La demanderesse s'est enfuie aux États-Unis le 22 mai 2007, laissant ses enfants au Mexique sous la garde de leurs grands-parents maternels. La demanderesse a vécu en Californie jusqu'au mois de janvier 2009.
[8]
En janvier 2009, la demanderesse est retournée au Mexique et a demandé des visas pour pouvoir amener ses enfants aux États-Unis, car elle avait appris que ses parents permettaient à son ancien conjoint de passer du temps avec les enfants. Lorsque les demandes de visa que la demanderesse avait présentées pour ses enfants ont été rejetées, elle a décidé de venir au Canada pour y demander l'asile. La conjointe de la demanderesse est venue la rejoindre au Canada.
[9]
Le 4 juillet 2011, la demanderesse a présenté un FRP modifié, dans lequel elle a ajouté deux autres motifs à sa demande d'asile, affirmant qu'elle ne craignait pas seulement son ancien conjoint à cause de la violence conjugale, mais aussi parce qu'il était lié au crime organisé et au trafic de stupéfiants en tant que membre du cartel de la drogue Los Aztecas. La demanderesse a aussi expliqué que des membres de la famille de son ancien conjoint qui vivent aux États-Unis ont des liens avec le crime organisé et des policiers corrompus au Mexique.
[10]
Dans son FRP modifié, la demanderesse a aussi affirmé qu'elle faisait l'objet de menaces de violence croissantes de la part de son ancien conjoint, qu'elle avait été rejetée par sa propre famille et qu'elle avait subi du harcèlement en raison de son identité de lesbienne. La demanderesse soutient que ses parents réprouvent son homosexualité et veulent qu'elle retourne auprès de son ancien conjoint malgré la violence conjugale.
La décision faisant l'objet du contrôle
[11]
Le tribunal a fait une analyse complète et approfondie des diverses allégations de la demanderesse, puis il a conclu que cette dernière n'avait ni une crainte subjective ni une crainte objective de persécution. Selon le tribunal, les questions déterminantes avaient trait au manque de crédibilité de certaines des allégations de la demanderesse, à l'existence d'une protection suffisante de l'État, à l'existence d'une possibilité de refuge intérieur (PRI) au Mexique et au fait que la demanderesse n'avait pas démontré qu'elle avait une crainte subjective de persécution. Comme je suis d'avis que les motifs du tribunal sont exhaustifs et raisonnables en tous points, je les résumerai de manière assez détaillée ci-après.
Les conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité
[12]
Le tribunal a conclu que la demanderesse était crédible quant à son homosexualité et à la violence conjugale dont elle avait été victime aux mains de son ancien conjoint de fait au Mexique. Cependant, le tribunal a conclu, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la demanderesse avait embelli ses allégations en ajoutant, dans l'exposé circonstancié joint à son FRP modifié, l'allégation selon laquelle son ancien conjoint et la famille de celui-ci étaient membres du cartel de la drogue Los Aztecas et avaient des liens avec des policiers. Selon le tribunal, aucun élément de preuve ne démontrait que l'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse était affilié officiellement à l'un des cartels de la drogue du Mexique et, si tel avait été le cas, la demanderesse l'aurait certainement mentionné dans son exposé circonstancié initial.
[13]
Le tribunal a estimé que les explications données par la demanderesse pour justifier l'absence de ces faits dans son FRP initial n'étaient ni raisonnables ni crédibles. La demanderesse a notamment affirmé qu'elle ne savait pas combien de renseignements elle devait fournir, car elle avait rempli son FRP sans aucune aide. Elle a aussi expliqué que sa connaissance rudimentaire de l'anglais lui avait permis de comprendre le FRP, mais pas l'exposé circonstancié, et qu'un traducteur de l'organisme communautaire lui avait dit de se concentrer sur les renseignements relatifs à la violence conjugale. Plus tard, elle a affirmé que lorsqu'elle avait rempli son FRP initial, elle ne se souvenait pas des détails sur les liens de son ancien conjoint avec Los Aztecas, car elle avait essayé de tout oublier. Le tribunal a conclu que la demanderesse avait fourni des explications contradictoires quant à cette omission importante et que le témoignage oral de la demanderesse n'était pas spontané ou digne de foi.
L'analyse de la protection de l'État
[14]
En outre, le tribunal a estimé que l'absence d'effort réfléchi de la demanderesse en vue d'obtenir la moindre protection de la police ou des tribunaux, et ce, tout au long de la période durant laquelle elle vivait avec son ancien conjoint ou après son retour des États-Unis, portait un coup fatal à la demande d'asile de la demanderesse. D'après le témoignage oral de la demanderesse, l'ancien conjoint de cette dernière a été emprisonné en janvier 2009 - avant le départ de la demanderesse pour le Canada - et il a été libéré en novembre 2011. Le Tribunal a conclu que, puisque l'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse avait été arrêté puis relâché par la police à de multiples reprises et que la police et les tribunaux mexicains avaient démontré qu'ils n'hésitaient pas à mettre en accusation et à poursuivre l'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse pour les crimes qu'il avait commis, la demanderesse aurait dû chercher à obtenir leur protection pour elle et ses enfants.
[15]
La demanderesse a témoigné qu'elle ne s'était pas adressée à la police parce qu'elle avait vu des policiers participer au trafic de la drogue et qu'elle croyait que les policiers étaient corrompus. Elle a aussi affirmé qu'elle n'avait demandé l'aide d'aucun organisme gouvernemental - par exemple, des refuges pour femmes battues ou des conseillers juridiques -, parce qu'elle avait honte d'être une victime de violence conjugale. Le tribunal a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas présenté des éléments de preuve suffisants pour réfuter la présomption de l'existence d'une protection de l'État ou démontrer qu'une telle protection était insuffisante compte tenu de ses circonstances.
[16]
Compte tenu de la preuve documentaire, y compris le rapport Hellman (
Rapport sur les droits de la personne au Mexique
, Judith Adler Hellman), le tribunal a conclu que malgré certaines contradictions entre les sources, « la prépondérance de la preuve objective concernant la situation actuelle dans le pays donne à penser que, bien qu'imparfaite, la protection de l'État offerte au Mexique est efficace et adéquate, que le pays fait de sérieux efforts pour régler le problème lié à la violence familiale et que les policiers sont disposés et aptes à protéger les victimes de ce type de violence ». Le tribunal a conclu que, selon la jurisprudence, la réticence subjective de la demanderesse à demander de l'aide et ses doutes sur l'efficacité de la protection fournie par l'État n'étaient pas suffisants pour réfuter la présomption de l'existence d'une protection de l'État.
[17]
Le tribunal a noté que la demanderesse n'avait pris aucune précaution juridique pour s'assurer de conserver la garde légale de ses enfants, malgré qu'elle ait dit craindre que son ancien conjoint enlève les enfants. Le tribunal a aussi souligné que, durant la période où il n'avait pas la garde, l'ancien conjoint n'a jamais refusé de ramener les enfants à leur mère après des visites et ne les a jamais agressés ou blessés. L'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse avait aussi accepté de fournir sa signature et les autorisations connexes qui étaient nécessaires pour obtenir des passeports afin que les enfants puissent se rendre à l'extérieur du Mexique en 2009. Selon le tribunal, aucun élément de preuve convaincant ne lui permettait de conclure que l'ancien conjoint ou sa famille avaient la moindre intention de faire du mal aux enfants à l'avenir ou qu'ils leur en avaient déjà fait. En fin de compte, le tribunal a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, les demandeurs mineurs ne courraient aucun risque aux mains de leur père ou de la famille élargie de ce dernier au Mexique.
La discrimination et la persécution
[18]
La demanderesse a soutenu que son homosexualité l'exposait à un risque élevé au Mexique. Elle a témoigné au sujet des commentaires et des gestes discriminatoires faits par son ancien conjoint, par sa propre famille et par d'autres membres de la collectivité au Mexique. Le tribunal a conclu que, malgré la gravité incontestable de tels incidents, ils n'atteignent pas le niveau de la persécution au sens de l'article 54 du
Guide des procédures et critères à appliquer pour déterminer le statut de réfugié
du Haut Commissariat des Nations unies pour les réfugiés (Genève, 1992). Selon ce document, des différences de traitement alléguées équivalent à des persécutions « lorsque les mesures discriminatoires auront des conséquences gravement préjudiciables pour la personne affectée, par exemple de sérieuses restrictions du droit d'exercer un métier, de pratiquer sa religion ou d'avoir accès aux établissements d'enseignement normalement ouverts à tous ».
[19]
En outre, le tribunal a noté que la demanderesse n'avait fourni aucun élément de preuve démontrant qu'elle avait été victime de persécution au jour le jour et il a conclu que les droits de la demanderesse n'avaient pas été brimés d'une manière qui pourrait être qualifiée de persécution.
La possibilité de refuge intérieur
[20]
Le tribunal a affirmé que, puisque la demanderesse vivait à Juárez avec son ancien conjoint et que, selon la preuve documentaire, les attitudes homophobes perdurent au Mexique, surtout dans les petits centres urbains, la demanderesse et ses enfants disposaient d'une PRI raisonnable et accessible à Guadalajara ou à Mexico. Selon le tribunal, la demanderesse a reconnu qu'elle et ses enfants pourraient vivre en sécurité dans l'une de ces villes, mais que sa conjointe ne pourrait pas y vivre avec eux, car elle n'a aucun statut juridique au Mexique. Le tribunal a ajouté que la demanderesse et sa conjointe pourraient retourner en Californie, là où la conjointe de la demanderesse résidait auparavant et où, contrairement à ce que pense la demanderesse, le mariage entre conjoints de même sexe est reconnu.
[21]
Le critère à deux volets qui permet de décider s'il existe une PRI a été énoncé par la Cour d'appel fédérale dans les arrêts
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CA). Il appartenait aux demandeurs de prouver, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que: (i) ils risquaient sérieusement d'être persécutés dans tout le pays, y compris aux endroits qui offraient prétendument une possibilité de refuge intérieur, c'est-à-dire Guadalajara et Mexico, et (ii) il serait trop exigeant de demander aux demandeurs de déménager à Guadalajara ou à Mexico. Le tribunal a examiné les deux volets du critère.
[22]
En appliquant le premier volet du critère de la PRI, le tribunal a examiné la déclaration de la demanderesse selon laquelle elle craignait que son ancien conjoint la retrouve n'importe où au Mexique, avec l'aide de sa famille ou de ses associés, au moyen des bases de données du gouvernement grâce à leurs relations dans la police et au gouvernement. Le tribunal s'est demandé si des criminels pourraient retrouver la demanderesse au moyen des banques de données du gouvernement, en utilisant, par exemple, la banque de données des cartes d'électeur délivrées par l'Institut fédéral électoral du Mexique. Sur le fondement de la preuve documentaire objective, le tribunal a conclu que l'information recueillie pour délivrer les cartes d'électeur est confidentielle et protégée par la loi. D'ailleurs, la Direction des recherches de la Commission n'a pu trouver d'exemples concrets d'une telle utilisation illégale par des personnes non autorisées parmi les sources d'information consultées (Cartable national de documentation, 20 avril 2011: point 3.4, MEX101353.EF, 2 juin 2006;
Carte d'électeur (Credencial para votar)
, point 3.6, MEX41642.EF; 24 juin 2003,
Information sur le Clave Unica de Registro de Poblacion (CURP)
; point 14.1, Canada, octobre 2005, Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié,
Mexique: Questions choisies sur la possibilité de refuge intérieur (juillet 2003 - juillet 2005)
). Le tribunal a affirmé que, même si la base de données était vulnérable et insuffisamment protégée, rien ne donnait à penser que, compte tenu des limites actuelles des technologies de traitement des données, cette base permettrait de retrouver des personnes précises dans un délai raisonnable. Le tribunal a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, l'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse ne pourrait pas la retracer au Mexique au moyen du registre des électeurs.
[23]
Pour ce qui est de l'homosexualité de la demanderesse, le tribunal a conclu que, même si la discrimination à l'égard des homosexuels demeure un problème majeur au Mexique, le gouvernement s'est fermement engagé à protéger ses citoyens homosexuels et a démontré qu'il peut leur fournir une protection adéquate. De plus, le tribunal a souligné que des lois antidiscrimination sont en vigueur à Mexico et qu'il y existe des mécanismes auxquels la demanderesse peut avoir recours pour veiller à ce que, en tant que lesbienne, ses droits soient protégés (Cartable national de documentation, 20 avril 2011: point 6.1, Andrew Reding, décembre 2003, World Policy Institute, « Mexique »,
Sexual Orientation and Human Rights in the Americas
; point 6.3, Global Rights, International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC), International Human Rights Clinic (IHRC) (Harvard Law School) et Colectivo Binni Laanu A.C., mars 2010, Virginia Corrigan,
The Violations of the Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Persons in Mexico: A Shadow Report
; point 6.4, MEX102682.EF, 9 janvier 2008,
Cas signalés d'agression sexuelle commise par des agents de police à l'endroit de personnes homosexuelles et d'autres personnes vulnérables (2006 - novembre 2007)
; point 6.5, MEX103460.FE, 21 avril 2010). Le tribunal a conclu, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la demanderesse ne serait pas exposée à une possibilité sérieuse de persécution en raison de son orientation sexuelle à Mexico ou, subsidiairement, à Guadalajara.
[24]
En appliquant le deuxième volet du critère de la PRI, le tribunal a noté que la demanderesse n'avait exprimé aucune inquiétude quant à la possibilité de trouver un emploi et un logement, ou tout autre problème lié à un déménagement, si elle retournait au Mexique avec ses enfants. Il a donc conclu, selon la prépondérance de la preuve, que la demanderesse pourrait trouver du travail dans les villes populeuses que sont Mexico et Guadalajara.
L'analyse relative à la crainte subjective
[25]
Finalement, le tribunal a conclu que le choix de la demanderesse de ne pas demander l'asile aux États-Unis était incompatible avec l'existence d'une crainte subjective de persécution et que cette décision minait la crédibilité des diverses allégations selon lesquelles elle craignait de subir un préjudice grave au Mexique.
[26]
La demanderesse a donné deux raisons pour expliquer le fait qu'elle n'avait pas demandé l'asile aux États-Unis. Elle a affirmé qu'elle ne voulait pas être liée juridiquement à un autre pays pendant que ses enfants se trouvaient au Mexique et elle a aussi dit ignorer qu'elle pouvait déposer une demande d'asile aux États-Unis. Le tribunal a rejeté ces deux explications, affirmant que la demanderesse avait une conjointe de fait américaine, que des membres de sa famille vivaient et travaillaient dans cette région et qu'elle aurait pu raisonnablement demander des conseils sur la possibilité d'obtenir un statut juridique aux États-Unis.
[27]
Le tribunal a aussi souligné que la demanderesse avait quitté le Mexique en 2007 en ayant l'assurance que ses parents prendraient bien soin de ses enfants. Dans son témoignage, la demanderesse a dit être retournée au Mexique en février 2009, lorsque son ancien conjoint avait dit être prêt à prendre la garde des enfants. Toutefois, selon la preuve documentaire, l'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse avait été emprisonné à compter du 2 janvier 2009. Le tribunal a donc conclu que les raisons du retour de la demanderesse au Mexique étaient floues, mais que sa décision de ne pas demander l'asile aux États-Unis n'aurait pas pu être fondée sur le fait que ses enfants étaient au Mexique. Le tribunal a aussi affirmé que la preuve ne permettait pas de conclure à l'existence d'une possibilité sérieuse de persécution pour un motif prévu à la Convention ou d'un risque de torture ou de peines ou traitements cruels et inusités dans les PRI proposées.
Questions en litige et norme de contrôle
[28]
La demanderesse a soulevé les questions suivantes dans sa demande de contrôle judiciaire:
a. Le tribunal a-t-il commis une erreur de droit en tirant ses conclusions sur la crédibilité au sujet:
i. des liens entre, d'une part, l'agresseur de la demanderesse et la famille de ce dernier et, d'autre part, un groupe criminel lié au trafic de la drogue?
ii. des raisons pour lesquelles la demanderesse était retournée au Mexique en 2009?
b. Le tribunal a-t-il commis une erreur de droit en tirant une conclusion déguisée en matière de crédibilité quant à la crainte des enfants d'être enlevés par leur père et, par le fait même, en faisant abstraction de la preuve dont il disposait?
c. Le tribunal a-t-il commis une erreur de droit en évaluant le fardeau qu'avait la demanderesse de demander la protection de l'État et, ce faisant, en interprétant erronément et en faisant abstraction des éléments de preuve pertinents et des Directives 4
: Revendicatrices du statut de réfugié craignant d'être persécutées en raison de leur sexe
(les Directives)?
d. La commissaire a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte de certains éléments de preuve lorsqu'elle a appliqué le critère de la PRI?
e. La commissaire a-t-elle commis une erreur en appliquant erronément le critère de la crainte subjective relativement au fait que la demanderesse n'avait pas demandé l'asile aux États-Unis?
[29]
Bien que la demanderesse ne se soit pas prononcée expressément sur la question de la norme de contrôle applicable, il est de jurisprudence constante que les questions de crédibilité et celle de savoir si la demanderesse a réfuté la présomption de l'existence d'une protection de l'État sont des questions mixtes de fait et de droit, et doivent donc être contrôlées suivant la norme de la décision raisonnable (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 12,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 19). Lorsque la Cour examine la décision du tribunal selon la norme de la décision raisonnable, elle doit s'attacher « à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
Analyse
Le tribunal a-t-il commis une erreur de droit en tirant ses conclusions sur la crédibilité?
[30]
La demanderesse conteste plusieurs des conclusions tirées par le tribunal en matière de crédibilité.
[31]
L'examen attentif du FRP initial de la demanderesse révèle clairement qu'elle a seulement mentionné la consommation de drogue de son ancien conjoint et décrit un incident où sa belle-sœur était venue chez eux avec une valise et y avait vraisemblablement laissé deux sacs de cocaïne. Aucun élément de l'exposé circonstancié de la demanderesse n'indique sans équivoque que l'ancien conjoint ou la famille de celui-ci participaient au trafic de stupéfiants, et l'exposé ne comporte aucune affirmation selon laquelle ils auraient le moindre lien avec des cartels de la drogue ou le crime organisé. Le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement conclure que l'omission de la demanderesse était plus importante que le simple défaut d'indiquer le nom du groupe en cause. Il était loisible au tribunal de conclure que, si l'ancien conjoint de la demanderesse était membre d'un cartel de la drogue notoire, la demanderesse l'aurait mentionné plus explicitement - même sans indiquer le nom du groupe ou d'autres détails -, et ce, à plus forte raison que la demanderesse avait donné assez de détails sur la consommation de drogue de son ancien conjoint. Le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement tirer une conclusion défavorable globale quant à la crédibilité en se fondant sur le fait que la demanderesse n'avait pas inclus un élément fondamental de sa demande d'asile dans son exposé circonstancié initial. Par conséquent, le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement rejeter les explications de la demanderesse, à savoir qu'on lui avait conseillé de se concentrer sur les allégations de violence conjugale et que sa connaissance rudimentaire de l'anglais l'avait empêchée de comprendre la version traduite de son exposé circonstancié avant de le signer.
[32]
La demanderesse conteste la conclusion du tribunal selon laquelle les raisons de son retour au Mexique en janvier 2009 étaient floues puisque son ancien conjoint était alors emprisonné et ne pouvait donc pas demander la garde des enfants ou tenter de les enlever. La demanderesse soutient qu'elle a seulement appris que son ancien conjoint était emprisonné après qu'elle eut entendu dire qu'il avait l'intention d'enlever les enfants. D'ailleurs, elle avait décidé de retourner au Mexique parce que son ancien conjoint était emprisonné et elle a quitté le pays peu après avoir appris qu'il allait être libéré.
[33]
Là encore, je ne suis pas d'accord avec la demanderesse pour dire que le tribunal a commis une erreur en exposant la preuve de manière erronée. Premièrement, la demanderesse n'avait pas inclus ces détails dans l'exposé circonstancié figurant à son FRP modifié ou dans son témoignage oral. Ainsi, au vu de la preuve, il était loisible au tribunal de tirer cette conclusion. Deuxièmement, le tribunal n'a pas fondé sa conclusion défavorable en matière de crédibilité sur l'invraisemblance de la raison invoquée par la demanderesse pour expliquer son retour au Mexique; il a seulement soulevé cette invraisemblance lorsqu'il a conclu à l'absence d'une crainte subjective chez la demanderesse. Par conséquent, même si le tribunal avait interprété la preuve erronément, une telle erreur n'aurait pas été déterminante pour le présent contrôle judiciaire (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 32).
[34]
La demanderesse conteste la conclusion du tribunal quant au risque que courraient les demandeurs mineurs aux mains de leur père ou de la famille élargie de ce dernier au Mexique. Selon elle, le tribunal n'a pas tenu compte des éléments de preuve relatifs au dossier criminel et au comportement violent du père des enfants, et le tribunal a tiré une conclusion déguisée en matière de crédibilité, à savoir que les enfants ne craignaient pas d'être enlevés par leur père. De plus, la demanderesse soutient qu'en rejetant les demandes des enfants sans motif valable, le tribunal les a aussi privés d'une analyse de la protection de l'État qui tiendrait compte de leur situation personnelle à titre de mineurs.
[35]
Pour démontrer qu'elle a la qualité de réfugié aux termes de la Loi, une personne doit établir qu'elle a une crainte subjective d'être persécutée ou exposée à un risque de préjudice et démontrer que cette crainte est justifiée objectivement (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 27). Seuls les risques allégués par le demandeur sont examinés.
[36]
En l'espèce, il n'a pas été prétendu que les demandeurs mineurs couraient des risques distincts de ceux auxquels serait exposée leur mère. Puisque la demanderesse a la garde des enfants et que leur père a des droits de visite limités depuis la séparation des conjoints en 2005, il était raisonnable de conclure, comme l'a fait le tribunal, que les craintes subjective et objective des enfants seraient étroitement liées à celles de leur mère. Le tribunal n'a donc pas commis d'erreur en examinant toutes les demandes en même temps et en rendant une décision - que la Cour juge raisonnable - au sujet de l'absence de crainte objective de la demanderesse. En outre, pour arriver à cette conclusion, le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement se fonder sur les éléments de preuve selon lesquels la présence de l'ancien conjoint dans la vie de ses enfants ne leur avait jamais été néfaste. Par ailleurs, le fait que la demanderesse soupçonne ses parents de garder contact avec son ancien conjoint n'est pas déterminant quant au risque auquel les enfants sont exposés, car la demanderesse est le parent qui a la garde et elle peut prendre les mesures nécessaires pour protéger ses enfants des dangers allégués.
[37]
Dans le même ordre d'idées, je suis d'avis que, pour évaluer la crainte subjective des enfants, le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement se fonder sur le témoignage de la demanderesse, en sa qualité de représentante désignée des enfants. Comme l'a dit le juge Lagacé dans la décision
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 38, lorsque le demandeur est frappé d'incapacité, en raison de l'âge ou d'une déficience, et lorsque la preuve établit que sa crainte a un fondement objectif, le tribunal doit se demander si le représentant désigné a établi l'existence d'une crainte subjective, en sa qualité de représentant désigné, et si la crainte subjective peut être inférée de la preuve. Le juge Lagacé a donc conclu qu'il n'est pas déraisonnable ou incorrect de ne pas aborder explicitement la crainte subjective de l'enfant mineur, car il est loisible au tribunal « de déduire que l'enfant mineur avait une crainte subjective à partir de la preuve présentée, y compris le témoignage du représentant désigné de l'enfant, qui s'exprimait au nom de ce dernier ».
Le tribunal a-t-il commis une erreur de droit en évaluant le fardeau qu'avait la demanderesse de demander la protection de l'État et, ce faisant, en interprétant erronément et en faisant abstraction des éléments de preuve pertinents et des Directives?
[38]
La demanderesse soutient que le tribunal a commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte des éléments de preuve selon lesquels il y a une absence de protection de l'État à Ciudad Juárez et dans l'État de Chihuahua, là où la demanderesse vivait et où la persécution a eu lieu, alors qu'une foule d'éléments de preuve démontrent qu'il s'agit d'une région très dangereuse pour les femmes.
[39]
Je conviens avec la demanderesse que, conformément aux principes énoncés dans l'arrêt
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, « [l] a conclusion du tribunal selon laquelle le demandeur d'asile n'a pas pris de mesures pour obtenir la protection de l'État, ne porte un coup fatal à la demande que dans le cas où celui-ci conclut également que la protection pouvait
raisonnablement être offerte
. Pour tirer une conclusion à cet égard, le tribunal est tenu d'examiner le caractère unique du pouvoir et de l'influence du persécuteur allégué sur la capacité et la volonté de l'État de protéger » [souligné dans l'original] (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (6)).
[40]
Par contre, les éléments de preuve invoqués par la demanderesse sont essentiellement statistiques et ils manquent de contexte. Je ne peux donc pas conclure que, compte tenu de la situation personnelle de la demandresse, il s'agit d'une preuve « pertinente, digne de foi et convaincante qui démontre au juge des faits, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection accordée par l'État en question est insuffisante » (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Il faut garder à l'esprit que la Cour doit présumer, jusqu'à preuve du contraire, que le tribunal a examiné et apprécié tous les éléments de preuve (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF)). En l'espèce, le tribunal a reconnu que la situation n'est pas parfaite au Mexique et qu'il existe des rapports contradictoires quant à l'efficacité de la législation en vigueur, mais il est arrivé à une conclusion justifiable au regard du droit et des faits en cause.
[41]
Le juge Russell est arrivé à une conclusion semblable au sujet d'une méthode statistique similaire que les demandeurs avaient utilisée pour démontrer l'absence de protection de l'État, aux paragraphes 33 à 35 de la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[33] L'asile est accordé à ceux qui peuvent établir qu'ils sont exposés à des risques ayant un lien avec un des motifs de la Convention. Une protection est également accordée à ceux qui sont personnellement exposés à un risque de préjudice dans leur pays d'origine. Dans les deux cas, l'État du pays d'origine doit ne pas vouloir ou ne pas pouvoir protéger ses propres citoyens pour que la protection internationale puisse être sollicitée. Dans le cas présent, l'État n'est pas l'agent de persécution et les demandeurs, qui ont vécu pendant longtemps aux États-Unis, n'ont pas véritablement demandé aux autorités salvadoriennes de les protéger contre ceux qui voulaient leur faire du mal.
[34] Le taux élevé d'homicides au Salvador ne nous apprend rien sur ce que l'État pourrait ou voudrait faire si les demandeurs sollicitaient sa protection. Selon moi, pour qu'elles soient pertinentes de quelque manière, les données statistiques devraient démontrer ce qui arrive à ceux dont les vies sont menacées et qui s'adressent à l'État pour obtenir sa protection. Le taux général d'homicide - qui tient compte des personnes assassinées pour des motifs autres que ceux prévus par la Convention, ainsi que de celles qui n'ont jamais demandé de protection - ne nous en apprend guère sur la présente affaire. Il se peut qu'il y ait une épidémie d'homicides au Salvador et que les autorités estiment difficile de redresser les chiffres, mais cela ne veut pas dire qu'elles ne peuvent ou ne veulent pas protéger les réfugiés qui pourraient demander à être protégés.
[35] Après avoir examiné la preuve, la SPR a conclu que les autorités salvadoriennes pourraient assurer et assureraient une protection suffisante à ceux qui solliciteraient leur protection au Salvador. Invoquer les données statistiques générales relatives aux homicides n'a véritablement aucune incidence sur la question en litige et le fait que la SPR n'ait pas expressément traité de ces données ne rend pas sa décision déraisonnable. Le taux d'homicide varie considérablement d'un pays à l'autre. Il ne saurait en soi être une mesure de la volonté ou de la capacité d'un État à protéger ceux qui demandent à être protégés contre la persécution en vertu de l'article 96 de la Loi, ou ceux qui sont exposés à l'un des risques prévus à l'article 97 de la Loi, lorsqu'il en a l'occasion. La protection passe par la communication et la collaboration de la personne qui s'estime en danger. En l'espèce, les demandeurs n'ont pas fait preuve de collaboration.
[42]
De plus, j'estime que la conclusion du tribunal quant au fait que la demanderesse n'avait aucunement cherché à obtenir la protection de l'État au Mexique ne témoigne pas d'un manquement aux exigences de sensibilité et de mise en contexte énoncées dans les Directives ou dans l'arrêt
R c Lavallee
, [1990] 1 RCS 852, de la Cour suprême du Canada.
[43]
La Cour est consciente de l'importance d'appliquer clairement les Directives et de la nécessité pour le tribunal de faire une analyse soigneuse, éclairée et empreinte de compassion de la conduite à laquelle on peut raisonnablement s'attendre d'une femme qui a été victime de violence (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 28, et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Cependant, la demanderesse n'a soulevé aucune question ou conclusion de fait qui démontrerait un tel manque de sensibilité ou de compassion de la part du tribunal, et j'estime qu'il n'y en a aucune. Comme l'a fait remarquer la juge Layden-Stevenson au paragraphe 10 de la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> : « les Directives concernant la persécution fondée sur le sexe ne délient pas nécessairement les demandeurs de leur obligation de rechercher la protection de l'État ». En l'absence de toute allégation précise démontrant que les Directives ont été mal appliquées, je suis d'avis que la conclusion du tribunal est raisonnable et suffisamment étayée par les éléments de preuve selon lesquels la demanderesse n'a jamais cherché à obtenir la protection de l'État au Mexique. D'ailleurs, la demanderesse n'a pas pris la moindre mesure juridique pour être certaine de conserver la garde des enfants, et ce, même si elle craignait prétendument que son ancien conjoint les enlève.
[44]
Il est bien établi qu'une conclusion raisonnable selon laquelle il existe une protection suffisante de l'État est fatale aux demandes fondées sur les articles 96 et 97 de la Loi. Par conséquent, je dois confirmer la décision contestée (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[45]
Les avocats n'ont proposé aucune question grave de portée générale et aucune question ne sera certifiée.
JUGEMENT
[46]
LA COUR STATUTE que
:
a. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
b. Aucune question grave de portée générale n'est certifiée.
[End of document]