[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This matter came before me at Vancouver on an expedited basis on December 22, 1994. The applicant seeks to stay a deportation order which is about to issue as a result of an outstanding departure notice which should have been adhered to in the past 30 days and which expired on December 21, 1994.
[2]
The applicant entered Canada in November of 1993 and remained here, except for a short period in July of 1994, when he returned to the U.S. for only a few hours to conclude the sale of boat of which he was the registered owner.
[3]
An inquiry proceeded before an adjudicator on November 16, 1994 at Vancouver. It was alleged that under ss. 27(2)(a) and 19(2)(a.1)(i) of the
Immigration Act
he was a person convicted of an offence outside the country which would disallow admission to Canada; or, in the alternative that he was a person who entered Canada as a visitor and remained after he ceased to be a visitor.
[4]
The applicant, a U.S. citizen had pleaded guilty to two offences in the state of California on October 25, 1988 to wit: burglary (a misdemeanour), that he entered a business with intent to commit theft; secondly, also a misdemeanour, unlawfully steal, take, and carry away the personal property of another.
[5]
During the course of the enquiry he admitted to pleading guilty to the offences referred to. The adjudicator's decision was that the applicant had not overstayed but that he was a person described in s. 27(2)(a) by 19(2)(a.1)(i) and that this had been established to her satisfaction. The main contention before me is that the adjudicator erred in finding, on the evidence before her, that the U.S. convictions under s. 459 of the
California Penal Code
were equivalent to Canadian
Criminal Codes
offences under s. 322. He submits that the adjudicator's reliance, in her decision, on definitions in
Black's Law Dictionary
to make her determination of equivalence was an error of law; that counsel should have been afforded an opportunity to respond and perhaps could have convinced the adjudicator that her interpretation of the definitions did not establish equivalency.
[6]
Counsel for the applicant submits that he is seeking leave for Judicial Review of the adjudicator's decision on the grounds mentioned above; that there is a serious issue to be tried; that irreparable harm arises because the deportation of the applicant to the U.S. would result in his immediate arrest, thus rendering any further decision moot should leave for Judicial Review, be granted; finally that the greater harm would result upon his deportation and there would be no inconvenience to the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
[7]
The Crown submits that the onus is on the applicant to satisfy the court on all elements before a stay should be granted.
[8]
Directing submission to irreparable harm, it was argued that the fact that the applicant would be arrested on his return to the U.S. and would render the issue moot, is of no consequence. His return to the U.S. and subsequent arrest may or may not result in further convictions and detention. It is not for the court to speculate. Referring to Reed, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at 107 wherein she wrote:
"To the extent that such arrest and detention might arise as a result of the applicant having left Nigeria on a false passport, the applicant cannot rely on harm which arises out of his own wrong doing as support for the staying of a deportation order."
[9]
The applicant submitted that he was engaged to a Canadian citizen with whom he has been living for over a year, and hardship would result. The respondent counters that there are no children of the union; the applicant not being authorized to work in Canada cannot be providing any financial support to his fiancee and thus further disadvantage her situation. The separation may result in personal inconvenience and some difficulty to both parties but does not give rise to irreparable harm, as alleged.
[10]
On the issue of balance of convenience, the court should consider the public interest as it relates to the personal harm that could come about in this particular case. Referring to Sopinka, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.), though dealing with an extradition case he wrote at p. 182:
"The most fundamental principle of immigration law is that noncitizens do not have an unqualified right to enter or remain in the country. At common law an alien has no right to enter or remain in the country."
[11]
I am not prepared to enter into a detailed review of the merits of applicant's contention on the serious issue of whether or not the adjudicator was correct in finding equivalency. I am satisfied that the onus resting with the applicant to convince me as to irreparable harm and balance of convenience has not been discharged. It should be remembered that the granting of a stay is discretionary and I am not prepared to exercise my discretion in favour of the applicant.
[12]
Motion discharged.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/slm
[End of document]