[1]
Denault, J.
: On December 31, 1992, Robab Farahi-Mahdavieh ("Mahdavieh") illegally entered Canada from the United States at the border near Vancouver. On January 3, 1993, while she was preparing to take a flight from Vancouver to Toronto, Mahdavieh was stopped and subsequently detained by immigration officials acting under the authority of a certificate signed and filed by the Solicitor General of Canada and the Minister of Employment and Immigration in accordance with s. 40.1(1) and (2) of the
Immigration Act
("the
Act
") which read as follows:
"40.1(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where the Minister and the Solicitor General are of the opinion, based on security or criminal intelligence reports received and considered by them, that a person, other than a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, is a person described in paragraph 19(1)(d), (e), (f), (g) or (j) or 27(2)(c), they may sign and file a certificate to that effect with an immigration officer, a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator.
"40.1(2) Where a certificate is signed and filed in accordance with subs. (1), an inquiry under this Act concerning the person in respect of whom the certificate is filed shall not be commenced, until the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d) has been made and a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator shall notwithstanding s. 23 or 103, detain or make an order to detain the person named in the certificate until the making of the determination."
[2]
The certificate filed in this matter states that, in the opinion of the Minister and Solicitor General, Mahdavieh does not qualify for admission to Canada as she is a member of the inadmissible class of persons described in s. 19(1)(g) of the
Act
which reads as follows:
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
(g) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe will engage in acts of violence that would or might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada or are members of or are likely to participate in the unlawful activities of an organization that is likely to engage in such acts of violence;"
[3]
Pursuant to the procedural requirements set out in s. 40.1(3) of the
Act
, notice of the filing of the certificate was sent to Mahdavieh and a copy of the certificate was referred to this court for a determination as to whether it should be quashed.
[4]
Designated by the Chief Justice to preside over this matter, I examined, in camera, the security intelligence reports and other evidence presented by the Minister and the Solicitor General, in accordance with s. 40.1(4) of the
Act
. Having regard for national security and the safety of persons, I provided Mahdavieh with a statement summarizing the information available to me that, in my opinion, would allow her to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the issuance of the certificate. Finally, I provided Mahdavieh with a reasonable opportunity to be heard at a hearing held in Vancouver on March 4, 1993.
The Issue:
[5]
Pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(d) of the
Act
, this court must "determine whether the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General is
reasonable
on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, and, if found not to be reasonable, quash the certificate".
[6]
Accordingly, I must decide, on the basis of the evidence and information available to me, whether it was reasonable in the circumstances of this case for the Minister and the Solicitor General to issue the certificate identifying Mahdavieh as a member of the inadmissible class of persons described in s. 19(1)(g) of the
Act
as "
persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe will engage in acts of violence that would or might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada or are members of or are likely to participate in the unlawful activities of an organization that is likely to engage in such acts of violence
".
Discussion:
[7]
Section 40.1 of the
Act
was enacted by
An Act to Amend the Immigration Act, 1976
and the
Criminal Code in consequence thereof
, S.C. 1988, c. 36, now c. 29 (4th Supp.), which was proclaimed in force October 3, 1988. As the Minister and the Solicitor General have yet to issue a significant number certificates pursuant to s. 40.1, the case law on the issue of the reasonableness of such certificates is quite limited.
[8]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , my colleague Mr. Justice Cullen discussed the standard of proof to be applied in cases where the court is called upon to review the reasonableness of administrative actions. The learned judge held that
"a higher standard of proof of reasonableness should be applied in cases where an interest in personal liberty is at stake."
Accordingly, Mr. Justice Cullen concluded that it was appropriate to raise the standard of proof required in cases involving the determination of the reasonableness of a certificate issued pursuant to s. 40.1, as the person named in the certificate was subject to mandatory detention while this court reviewed whether the Minister and Solicitor General exercised their discretion reasonably.
[9]
In my opinion, however, the court should not require the executive to satisfy a higher standard of proof of reasonableness, where, as in the present case, the Minister and the Solicitor General have determined that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person named in the certificate "will engage in acts of violence that would or might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada or is a member of or is likely to participate in the unlawful activities of an organization that is likely to engage in such acts of violence".
[10]
The
Immigration Act
provides that only citizens and certain permanent residents have a right to enter or remain in Canada (ss. 4 and 5). No other person has such rights. Parliament has provided for a legislative scheme whereby the right of persons seeking to enter or remain in Canada is normally decided upon at an inquiry presided over by an adjudicator (s. 32). When a certificate pursuant to s. 40.1 is signed and filed and has not been quashed by this court, it operates as conclusive proof that the person named in that certificate is a member of an inadmissible class (s. 40.1(7)(a)). The inadmissible classes to which this distinct regime of certification applies are those related to violence, espionage and subversion. The certificate must be based on a security or a criminal intelligence report. The issues raised in such cases, therefore, are ones which engage the national security interest. This is supported by the fact that the procedure contemplated in s. 40.1(4) of the
Act
suggests that a great deal of information which would be injurious to the national security or the safety of persons cannot be disclosed. Under these circumstances, it is only reasonable to conclude that the court should not demand that the Ministers prove a high degree of probability that the acts which it is feared will be committed by the person named in the certificate will actually be committed.
[11]
The requirement that there be reasonable grounds to believe that a person is "a member of an organization that is likely to engage in acts of violence which might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada" does not require proof of actual membership in such an organization to be made out. It is sufficient to meet the statutory requirement that the evidence show that there are
reasonable grounds to believe
that the person is a member of such an organization.
[12]
In my opinion, the test to be applied is the one underscored in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where the Federal Court of Appeal, in reviewing the justification for an allegation that the potential visitor was a member of a subversive organization, stated the following at pp. 225-226:
"But where the fact to be ascertained on the evidence is whether there are reasonable grounds for such a belief, rather than the existence of the fact itself, it seems to me that to require proof of the fact itself and proceed to determine whether it has been established is to demand the proof of a different fact from that required to be ascertained. It seems to me that the use by the statute of the expression 'reasonable grounds for believing' implies that the fact itself need not be established and that evidence which falls short of proving the subversive character of the organization will be sufficient if it is enough to show reasonable grounds for believing that the organization is one that advocates subversion by force, etc. In a close case the failure to observe this distinction and to resolve the precise question dictated by the statutory wording can account for a difference in the result of an inquiry or an appeal."
and further, the court added at p. 228:
"... the question to be decided was whether there were reasonable grounds for believing, etc., and not the fact itself of advocating subversion by force, etc."
Evidence Presented By The Canadian
Security Intelligence Service
("The Service"):
[13]
In the statement summarizing the security intelligence reports presented at the in camera hearing before this court (the "report"), the Service claims that it has reason to believe that Mahdavieh is a leading member of the Mujahedhin E Khalq (the "MEK"), an association which it claims is "a known terrorist organization which has engaged in urban guerrilla operations internationally".
[14]
The Service maintains that it has reasonable grounds to believe that, during her sojourn in Canada between September 1991 and June 1992, Mahdavieh:
1. participated in planning the attack carried out by the MEK against the Iranian Embassy in Ottawa on April 5th, 1992;
2. was responsible for the command and control of various cells or chapters of the MEK across Canada. Her activities included:
a) directing all fundraising activities for the MEK in Canada;
b) expanding the membership of the MEK in Canada, and
c) recruiting more persons to join the ranks of the National Liberation Army of Iran (NLAI).
Accordingly, the Service contends that Mahdavieh is an inadmissible person within the meaning of s. 19(1)(g) of the
Act
.
[15]
The report identifies the MEK as an organization whose principal objective is to overthrow the current Iranian government and to replace it with an Islamic socialist state. It goes on to name a number of organizations which are believed to be associated with the MEK, these being the National Council of Resistance (NCR), the National Liberation Army of Iran (NLAI), and the Moslem-Iranian Student Society (MISS), an organization composed of young Iranian dissidents living in the West who have been known to assist the MEK in its objectives. The report lists the terrorist activities of the MEK, describing an association which appears to be highly organized throughout Europe and Canada.
[16]
According to the report, Mahdavieh first came to Canada from London, England in September 1991 on a three week visitor's visa. Upon the expiration of this visa, Mahdavieh apparently returned to England, applying for and receiving a number of subsequent visitor's visas and extensions thereof.
[17]
As earlier mentioned, the Service believes that, while in Canada, Mahdavieh was involved in the planning of the attack on the Iranian Embassy in Ottawa which took place on April 5, 1992. It contends that Mahdavieh was in fact the leader of this organization in Canada, directing MEK fundraising activity, expanding the membership of the MEK in Canada and recruiting potential members of the NLAI.
[18]
According to the report, Mahdavieh apparently left Canada in June 1992. After having been refused a visa to return to Canada in October 1992, she would then have illegally travelled into Canada on December 31, 1992 as described above.
[19]
The actual report examined in camera by this court, a summary of which was sent to Mahdavieh, presented a much more detailed account of the Service's investigation into the circumstances of this case and contained a great deal more information which cannot be disclosed in these reasons, as such disclosure would be injurious to national security or the safety of persons.
Evidence Presented By The Detainee:
[20]
Mahdavieh chose to exercise her right to be heard and filed an expert report on the activities of the MEK which will be discussed below.
[21]
Mahdavieh is a young Iranian woman who has travelled extensively throughout Europe, Canada and the United States since she left Iran in 1979, shortly after Khomeini's regime came to power. Being approximately 18 years old at the time, she decided to study in England. Following the execution of some of her cousins in Iran in the early eighties, Mahdavieh became politically active in the
Moslem-Iranian Student Society
("
MISS
"). She testified that her involvement in this organization consisted primarily of distributing newspapers and participating in meetings and demonstrations against the Khomeini regime. In 1983, she was married and discontinued her studies to devote herself to the
MISS
on a full-time basis. In 1986, she was granted refugee status and asylum in the United Kingdom (Exhibit 1). The travel document which was issued to her in the United Kingdom allowed her to travel more extensively throughout Europe and North America, where she often ventured to visit friends, raise funds for the Mujahedhin and participate in demonstrations.
[22]
At the hearing of this matter, Mahdavieh testified that neither the MEK nor the NLAI has an office or branch in Canada. She stated that the NCR had only one representative in Canada, a professor living in Toronto. She freely admitted to being a member of the MEK since 1987 but denied playing any significant role within this organization. She admitted that, while in Canada, her political activities were limited to raising funds and recruiting young Iranians to join the ranks of the NLAI. Finally, Mahdavieh denied being involved in either the planning or the execution of the violent demonstration which took place at the Iranian Embassy in Ottawa on April 5, 1992.
[23]
The evidence presented at the hearing of this matter revealed that on April 5, 1992, a number of Iranian embassies throughout the world were violently attacked by Iranian dissidents protesting the previous day's bombing of an NLAI base in Iraq. Apparently this event sparked the simultaneous attack on Iranian missions in Germany, France, Great Britain, Switzerland, Holland, Sweden, Norway, Canada, the United States and Australia. In Ottawa, the demonstrators carried sticks and hammers and several people including the ambassador were injured by assailants who gained entry to the embassy. Mahdavieh maintained her position that she was not involved in these events, despite admitting that, on April 5, 1992, she was living in Toronto with her cousin, who travelled to Ottawa to participate in the demonstration.
[24]
Throughout her testimony, Mahdavieh attempted to convince this court that she was not a violent person and that the MEK was not a terrorist organization.
[25]
It should be noted that Mahdavieh admits to having illegally entered Canada and that she is not seeking to remain in this country. She has even agreed to be deported on the grounds that she entered Canada without an appropriate visa. However, she objects to being deported for the reasons outlined in the certificate issued pursuant to s. 40.1, which she maintains are false. More importantly, however, she fears the revocation of her travel document and perhaps even her refugee status in England, which could be affected if she is deported for the reasons set out in the certificate.
[26]
At the hearing, Mahdavieh's counsel filed what he considered to be an expert report without making the expert available for cross-examination. This report is in fact a two page letter written by an academic researcher in Middle Eastern and Iranian affairs at the University of Salford in England. The report, which attempts to refute the allegations contained in the summary statement sent to Mahdavieh regarding the MEK, does not meet the requirements concerning the production of documents contained in the
Federal Court Rules
(r. 482). However, s. 40.1(5) of the
Immigration Act
permits this court to receive such evidence or information as it sees fit, whether or not the evidence would be admissible in a court of law. Consequently, the court accepts the production of the expert report.
Findings:
[27]
I do not intend to discuss the contents of the report discussed above as it essentially attempts to demonstrate that the MEK is not a terrorist organization. In my opinion, the matter placed before this court does not require a finding on this issue. Consequently, I find this document to be of very limited use to the court.
[28]
In my view, Mahdavieh's testimony greatly lacked credibility. At the time of her arrest in Vancouver, Mahdavieh had no identification in her own name but was in possession of a U.S. Green Card apparently belonging to a friend and a plane ticket issued in the name of a second friend. Her statement that she was to obtain a visa after her arrival in Toronto greatly strains credibility as do her improbable explanations regarding her ignorance of Canadian procedures. Having been through the process of applying for a Canadian visitor's visa on several occasions, I find her explanations untenable.
[29]
I have no doubt that Mahdavieh's involvement in the activities of the MEK is more significant than she would have this court believe. Even though she admitted to participating in the fundraising activities of the MEK and to recruiting young Iranians to join the ranks of the NLAI while she was in Canada, she continually tried to downplay her importance within this organization. The fact that she admitted to travelling throughout Europe and North America, devoting all of her time, energy and resources to the fundraising and recruiting activities of the MEK and related organizations, as well as the abundance of evidence presented in camera lead me to conclude that Mahdavieh's involvement with the MEK in Canada is substantial.
[30]
As I mentioned above, it is not the role of the court to determine whether the MEK is a terrorist organization. Similarly, it is not the role of this court to determine whether Mahdavieh actively participated in the attack on the Iranian Embassy in Ottawa. This court must determine whether the certificate issued pursuant to s. 40.1 of the
Act
was reasonable, in light of the evidence and information presented. More specifically, the court must determine whether the Minister and Solicitor General had reasonable grounds to believe that Mahdavieh is an inadmissible person under s. 19(1)(g) of the
Immigration Act
by virtue of being
a member of or being likely to participate in the unlawful activities of an organization that is likely to engage in acts of violence that would or might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada
.
[31]
Mahdavieh has admitted to being a member of the MEK and has devoted her life's work to the objectives of this organization. There can be little doubt, based on the information and evidence presented to this court, that the MEK was involved in the planning of the attack on the Iranian Embassy in Ottawa on April 5, 1992. The mere action of staging an event in which members and supporters are asked to enter diplomatic premises by force and use sticks and hammers to make their way through the mission leads me to conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the MEK is "
an organization that is likely to engage in acts of violence that might endanger the safety of persons in Canada
". Under these circumstances, it was reasonable for the Minister and the Solicitor General to issue a certificate pursuant to s. 40.1 of the
Act
finding that Mahdavieh was in fact a member of the inadmissible class of persons described in s. 19(1)(g) of the
Act
.
[32]
For all of the above reasons, I have determined, pursuant to the authority of s. 40.1(4)(d) of the
Act
, that the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to me.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Janette Blue/blk
[End of document]