[1]
Reed, J.
: The defendants were ordered to appear to show cause why they should not be found in breach of various orders of this court. The reasons which follow explain why a finding of contempt was made.
[2]
The plaintiff was elected Head Chief of the Blood Tribe of Southern Alberta on November 26, 1992. The election took place pursuant to the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
recognized by the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5, as governing that election. The defendants are all councillors of the tribe who were also elected in that election.
[3]
The electoral process is such that while the Chief is elected on a separate ballot, individuals may run for both the office of chief and for the position of councillor. The individual who obtains the most votes and who has run for both offices can choose to either become chief or to serve as a councillor. If he or she decides not to become chief, then, the individual with the next highest votes becomes chief or if they have run for both offices has the option to choose.
[4]
Prior to being elected chief, Harley Frank had not served for any extensive term or terms as a councillor. In 1976, he served for a very brief period of time but had not done so subsequently. When running for chief in 1992 he ran on a platform of change. He had perceived, from speaking to some of the electors, that the incumbent holders of the offices of chief and councillor were considered by some to be serving only a limited sector of the electorate. He was concerned to remedy this. He was also very concerned about the financial health of the tribe. One practice he particularly criticized, when giving his evidence, was the holding of council meetings off the reserve, for example, in hotels in Calgary or Edmonton. In his view, these should be held in the band council chambers on the reserve. Meetings off the reserve mean that unnecessary expenses are incurred. They also make it virtually impossible for band members to attend those meetings since travel expenses have to be incurred to do so.
[5]
Prior to his election as Chief, Harley Frank worked for the Blood Tribe Administration in an economic development position. In that capacity he had been instructed by the then chief and council to pursue vigorously the purchase of a buffalo herd for the band. He considered this to be both a good economic investment and one which would have significant and positive spiritual connotations for the band. After being elected Chief, as this project was coming to fruition, he made a report, as Chief, to the council concerning the purchase of the herd, including the prospective sale of the cow-calf herd to pay for that purchase. No objection was raised by any of the councillors to this plan of action.
[6]
Sometime in February 1993, two documents fell into the hands of some members of council and of the tribe. These documents were viewed as proposing significant changes to the power relationship between the chief and council. Both documents were authored by non-Indians. One, Clint Wilson, worked under contract with the band as an advisor on financial matters. The other, Wade Alston, had worked prior to December 31, 1992, on contract as an economic development advisor. He had worked on a day to day basis with Harley Frank when he was working for the administration. It was easy, then, to characterize the two documents as having been authored by Harley Frank or as reflecting his views. In fact he did not author them, had never seen one of them and while he thought it was likely that the other had come across his desk he did not recollect having spent any amount of time on it. (Some parts, those relating to economic development matters, he had seen at an earlier time.) Insofar as either document espoused the view that both chief and councillors should be responsive to the electorate, Harley Frank shared and endorsed that view.
[7]
One of the documents, entitled
The Turning Point
, was written in extremely inflammatory language. It is this document which Harley Frank had not seen and it was authored by Wade Alston when he was no longer working under contract for the Blood Tribe Administration. It is not difficult to see why that document created an almost hysterical reaction. It has a very strident tone and is written in very intemperate language.
[8]
In any event, the councillors, instead of (1) trying in as objective a manner as possible to determine whether Harley Frank was the author, or espoused the views expressed in the documents, or (2) debating the ideas which were set out in the documents on their merits, began what can only be described as a campaign to hound Harley Frank from his position as chief. I should note, in addition, that the evidence of Harley Frank, which was not contradicted, was that the customs of the Blood Tribe, at least as late as 1976, accorded the Chief a dominant role in decision making and that he was not considered to be just one of 13 equal voters comprising the Chief and Council.
[9]
The arrangements for the purchase of the buffalo had been made in January 1993, as was the presentation to the Council. The credit arrangements which involved the use of the band's VISA card occurred on January 22, 1993 (a credit) and January 28, 1993 (a debit). The buffalo were scheduled to arrive on March 8, 1993. The inflammatory documents referred to above were circulated between these two dates.
[10]
On March 4, 1993, Mr. Goodstriker (the Band Manager) fired Clint Wilson alleging that he had arranged for extended credit on the credit card of the Chief and Council without proper authorization. In addition, the Council issued a press release (contact person Randy Bottle) stating that the Blood Tribe would not receive the bison and would assume no responsibility for any of the financial cost involved.
[11]
The Council met on March 6 and 7, 1993, without notice to Chief Harley Frank, and passed a resolution to proceed with the removal of Harley Frank from office by invoking s. 9.01.04 of the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
:
"9.01 The office of Chief or Councillor becomes vacant when the person who holds that office:
. . . . .
9.01.04 is subject to a declaration of the majority of the Blood Tribe Council that such person is unfit to continue in office by reason that:
9.01.04.01 he has been convicted of an indictable offence during his term of office,
9.01.04.02 he has been absent from regular meetings from the Blood Tribe Council for more than two and one-half days of the meetings generally being held for the third full week of the calendar month for each of three consecutive regular Council meetings without being authorized by the Blood Tribe Council in respect of each such absence.
9.01.04.03 he was guilty, in connection with an election, of corrupt practice, accepting a bribe, dishonesty or malfeasance, or
9.01.04.04 he is guilty of neglect of his duty as a Councillor, malfeasance in office, or misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the Blood Tribe Council."
[12]
The resolutions which were passed on March 6 and 7, 1993, stated that removal was to proceed on the ground that Harley Frank was guilty of neglect of his duty, malfeasance in office or misconduct. The resolutions stated that the Council would adopt s. 11.01.01 proceedings for Harley Frank's removal and that, in the meantime, he was suspended from office, his signing authority was removed and all appropriate organizations and departments should be notified of this. Randy Bottle was appointed Acting Chief and a decision not to accept the buffalo affirmed. Sections 11.01 and following of the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
state:
"11.01 No Chief or Councillor shall be removed pursuant to s. 9.01.04 unless:
11.01.01 not less than five days prior to a meeting at which the proceedings shall be heard, the Chief or a Councillor has
11.01.01.01 filed with the Blood Tribal Administrator who is the Chief Operating officer of the Blood Tribe Administration, and
11.01.01.02 personally served on the Chief and each Councillor (including the person against whom proceedings are being taken)
a written signed statement setting out the grounds under which removal is sought and the evidence in support of the proceeding.
11.01.02 the proceeding is presented at such meeting by the person initiating removal including sworn evidence in support thereof. The onus of proof shall be on such person.
11.01.03 the person against whom the proceeding is being taken is given a full opportunity to make answer and defence to the proceeding, including requiring the production of evidence and the attendance of witnesses."
[13]
On March 8, 1993, the buffalo arrived on the reserve as scheduled. There were physical confrontations concerning this and considerable media attention, no doubt in large part because of the press release which had been issued by the Council.
[14]
On the same day, Randy Bottle wrote Mr. Frank a letter notifying him of the decision the Council had taken on March 6 and 7:
"The Blood Tribe Council, at its meetings of March 6th and 7th, 1993, reviewed and discussed your conduct and actions since taking office and have come to the conclusion you are no longer fit to continue in the Office of Chief of the Blood Tribe.
"The Council of the Blood Tribe is disturbed with the arbitrary manner in which you conduct business and the manner in which you commit or bind the Band without Council's knowledge and consent. The Council has been completely excluded from very major decisions you have made that would otherwise require Council approval or consent. You consistently work independent of Council despite our efforts to work together in a cooperative manner.
"The Council is particularly disturbed with the manner in which you arbitrarily proceeded with the purchase of the buffalo. Council was never consulted nor was Council's consent and approval ever given. Further to this, you do not have the authority nor did you receive approval to sell the Tribe's cow-calf herd.
"The Council is also extremely disturbed with a document that has just recently come to their attention entitled '
Blood Nation Development Strategy + Key Departmental and Corporate Structuring
' and another document within, titled '
The Turning Point
' 'The Council must prove their loyalty to the people'. This document outlines your strategy and scheme, in conjunction with your non-Indian consultants, to usurp the authority of Council and rest full and complete authority in yourself and an 'Executive Committee' made up of these non-Indians and nonmembers. This is clearly a conspiracy to run a 'centralized dictatorial style' of government as you have vividly described it. The Council of the Blood Tribe, in the best interests of its Members, cannot ignore and allow you to continue as you have and to follow through with a very dangerous scheme as evidenced in these documents.
"The Council of the Blood Tribe, to protect the interests of the Tribe as a whole and its Members have, by motion, decided to commence the process to remove you from the Office of Chief as outlined in the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
. This letter is to inform you of the unanimous decision of all 12 Councillors and that until such time as a hearing to determine the final outcome, the Council hereby suspends all your authority as Chief complete with suspension of your signing authorities and decision making powers. All appropriate organizations such as the Department of Indian Affairs will be notified immediately. Council, by motion, is not ratifying the purchase of the buffalo and will not allow them onto the Blood Reserve. ...
"You will be served with a statement outlining in detail the grounds under which your removal from the office of Chief is being sought in the next short while. You will be given the opportunity to be heard before Council makes a final determination. All of this is in accordance with our Election Bylaw."
[15]
On March 9, 1993, a petition was organized against Mr. Frank and signatures began to be collected under the following rubric:
"We want his removal because we believe in a democratic government where decisions are made by both Chief and Council, not by the Chief alone. We believe that Council has a vital role to play in our government and that their role should not be taken over by a non-Indian, nonelected executive committee."
[16]
Section 10 of the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
states:
"10.01 A proceeding for the removal of the Chief or Councillor of the Blood Tribe may be initiated by any eligible voter filing with the Blood Tribe Administrator a petition on which shall appear:
10.01.01 The grounds pursuant to s. 9.01.04 on which removal of a designated Chief or Councillor is sought.
10.01.02 The evidence in support of the petition,
10.01.03 The signature of the originator of the petition.
10.01.04 The signatures of not less than one third of the eligible voters of the Blood Tribe in support of the petition.
"10.02 On receipt of such petition, the Blood Tribe Administrator shall verify that the Petition complies with s. 10.01. If the Petition does not so comply, the Blood Tribe Administrator shall so notify the Petitioner.
"10.03 If the Petition complies, the Administrator shall place the matter on an agenda for a regular meeting of the Blood Tribe Council not less than three weeks from the date of receipt of the petition and shall serve the said petition on the Chief and Councillors of the Blood Tribe Council.
"10.04 At such meeting, the proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with s. 11.01 except that the presentation of the petition and the evidence in support thereof shall be made by the originator of the petition and the onus of proof shall be on such person."
[17]
On March 9, 1993, the author of the
Turning Point
took out an advertisement in a local newspaper and circulated a text which reads as follows:
"To Members of the Blood Tribe, Chief Frank, Blood Tribe Council and Administration, Mr. Clint Wilson, and Professors Phil Lane and Rick Hinton:
"I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere public apology to Chief Harley Frank, the Blood Tribe Council and Administration, the people of the Blood Tribe, Mr. Clint Wilson and Professors Phil Lane and Rick Hinton of the University of Lethbridge.
"I would first like to make it absolutely clear that Chief Harley Frank has never seen the document which I prepared and for which he is currently being persecuted. I refer to the unsolicited draft paper entitled
Blood Tribe Organization and Development Strategy: The Turning Point
which I wrote and which has been circulated to the Blood Band Council and Administration, the media, Blood Band members and at the University of Lethbridge. Chief Frank had no knowledge of this draft document and absolutely no design or participation in its construction, nor in the philosophies behind it. Nor did I ever discuss it with him. These ideas were my own and no one else's.
"I acted impulsively in this matter based on experience with other government organizations in other parts of the world, and now realize that this approach is completely inappropriate as it relates to the Blood Tribe.
"I was hired to serve the Blood Tribe as a development planner. I was not hired to do governmental planning of any kind. I took this upon myself, and I obviously now regret putting such impulsive thoughts on paper. I also apologize for the use of Blood Tribe Economic Development Department letterhead for this document. This was inappropriate and unjustified.
"Concerning the advice of professors Lane and Hinton mentioned in this document, I seriously misstated their intentions and ideas concerning Tribal government. I can attest that their only interest is to provide encouragement and support for the Blood people in their various capacities at the University of Lethbridge. I would further mention that neither of these capable and dedicated men [nor Chief Frank] encourage, in any way, movement towards any form of 'dictatorial style' of government for the Blood Tribe. I extend my sincerest apologies to each of them.
"I would finally mention that my contractual arrangement with the Blood Tribe ended December 31, 1992. The package which contained the document in question was dated January 29, 1993. Again, this personally developed document was never seen by Chief Frank, and it somehow was uncovered and unfairly used to attack very honourable and capable men.
"Again, to all concerned, to Chief Frank, to the Council and Administration of the Blood Tribe, to Professors Lane and Hinton, to Clint Wilson and, particularly, to the people of the Blood Tribe, I extend my most sincere and heartfelt apology.
"Wade D. Alston"
[18]
On March 10, 1993, an informal meeting took place at which Harley Frank, the council members and some of the elders were present. It was agreed that the Chief and Council would try to work together and they talked about establishing a cooling off period.
[19]
Two days later, Harley Frank was served with a notice that a council meeting was to be held at the Carriage House Inn, in Calgary, on March 17, 1993, to give him an opportunity to respond to a Statement of Grounds for his removal, dated March 9, 1993, which had been served on him. He was instructed not to enter the Blood Tribe administration building or to conduct any official Blood Tribe business in the interim. He was locked out of the administration building and his office by the Council.
[20]
The "Statement of Grounds for Removal of Harley Frank ...", signed by all the councillors, alleged among other things that: he had refused to cooperate with council; had absented himself from regularly scheduled meetings; had stated he did not need Council's consent for major administrative and financial decisions; had hired non-Indian consultants without Council's consent; had committed fraud in connection with the purchase of a $3,000 lap top computer; had made an inappropriate use of the Blood Tribe Visa card and unauthorized withdrawals of cash in order to purchase the buffalo when that purchase had never been authorized; had been untruthful because he had stated he was willing to work with counsel and be open and honest with them when in fact he had a hidden agenda as evidenced by two documents; and
"... of the greatest overall concern, is your apparent agenda to take all political functions away from the Council, and vest them in yourself as Chief. It is alleged that the document entitled
Blood Nation Development Strategy and Key Departmental and Corporate Structuring
which is attached as an exhibit to this Statement of Grounds, is one that you either created or subscribe to. The document is considered to be ant-democratic [sic] and anti-consensus.
"Being such, the document is clearly contrary to custom and the Bylaws which govern the internal affairs of the Blood Tribe. Moreover, the document referred to makes clear your plans to relocate Council to an advisory capacity only and that you intend to centralize all power in yourself with only an Executive Committee to provide you with guidance. This too is contrary to the best interests of the Blood Tribe, contrary to the custom of the Band and an approach which brings the administration of government of the Blood people into disrepute.
"The Council of the Blood Tribe submits that the ground aforesaid are sufficient to find that you have neglected your duty as Chief, that you are guilty of malfeasance in Office and that your behaviour amounts to misconduct reflecting badly on the dignity and integrity of the Blood Tribe Council as defined in s. 9.01.04.04 of the Bylaw. ..."
[21]
On March 14, Chief Harley Frank circulated a "Letter to the People" which stated in part "the days of corruption are over. The days of ignoring our customs and traditions are over ...".
[22]
Harley Frank did not attend the March 17th meeting in Calgary. He sent a lawyer on his behalf. The position taken by him was still that the purported removal proceedings were invalid because the councillors were acting as the prosecutors as well as the judge and jury. The proceeding did not accord with the rules of fundamental justice which require that an individual, when accused of serious allegations such as those asserted against Harley Frank, is entitled to a decision by an impartial and objective decision maker. The March 17, 1993, meeting was adjourned to March 25, 1993.
[23]
On March 17, 1993 while the councillors were holding their meeting in Calgary, Harley Frank and his supporters held a meeting in the council chambers on the reserve. Any member of the tribe who wanted to attend was invited to do so and to express their views. On the same day he also fired three members of the administration: Wilton Goodstriker (Band Manager), Annabel Crop-Eared-Wolf (Police Commission Head) and Eugene Creighton (Band Solicitor). On March 18, 1993, Mr. Frank wrote to Darlene Plume (Director of Finance) stating that no expenditures were to be processed without his consent and authorization and instructing her from that date forward to report directly to him.
[24]
Some time after midnight on March 18, 1993, Chief Harley Frank was told that it was around 2:00 a.m. on March 19, 1993, the council members entered the administration building and purportedly instructed the Blood Tribe police to deny access to everyone except the 12 councillors. After being informed of the closure of the building, Harley Frank and other members of the tribe, together with members of a CBC camera crew, went to the Blood Tribe administration building, as Randy Bottle was directing staff to close the social service offices therein.
[25]
On March 19, 1993, counsel for both the defendants and the plaintiff sought an urgent hearing before the court. The applicant filed a notice of motion seeking an injunction to require that access to the administration building be made available to all authorized parties. The motion also sought a declaration determining the respective authority of the Chief and the Council, and alternatively an order declaring that he should exercise all the powers of the chief and council until a general election could be held to elect a new council. This application was heard by Mr. Justice Muldoon, by telephone. He issued an order putting obligations on both sides. Part of that order reads:
"1. The Council and any ad hoc faction thereof or group of councillors be, and they are hereby forbidden and enjoined from deposing or purporting to depose Harley Frank the Band Chief, except by due process of law and as may be specifically authorized by law;
. . . . .
"5. Dismissals of Wilton Goodstricker [sic], Eugene Creighton, Annabelle Crop-Eared-Wolf, and Wayne Hamby, of their purported dismissals be, and they are hereby, suspended until further order of this court;
. . . . .
"7. The Chief Harley Frank be, and he is hereby forbidden and enjoined from acting apart from the Council in meeting or assembly duly called, and from incurring any expenses against the Band or its funds for cash or credit in excess of $25 per day, Sundays excluded;"
[26]
The Council meeting which had been adjourned in Calgary on March 17, was reconvened at the Parkside Inn, in Lethbridge, on March 25 - March 29. The Chief again did not attend but sent counsel to represent him. Again counsel took the position that the proceeding which the councillors were purporting to conduct constituted a denial of fundamental justice. On March 28, 1993, Harley Frank sent a letter to all members of the Blood Tribe administration stating that the rumours which were circulating, to the effect that he had prepared a "hit-list" of band employees which he proposed to fire, were not true: "I can assure you that no such list exists and I have no intentions of pursuing such actions". At trial when an alleged list was produced, the evidence was that Harley Frank had not written it, had never seen it before and would not have had reason to fire many of the people whose names appeared thereon.
[27]
On March 29, 1993, the following resolutions were passed by the Council in Lethbridge:
"... that Council proceed with charges against Harley Frank under the
Indian Act
of s. 2.3B and that instructions be given to our Legal Department and Chris Evans to proceed with these actions. All in favour. Carried
"... that we reaffirm our decision made on Thursday, March 25, 1993 that we have removed Chief Harley Frank and that we proceed with the bi-election of a new head Chief for the Blood Tribe until such time we are served with the new court injunction. All in favour. Carried."
[28]
On March 29, the council terminated the employment of some of the administrative staff who were supporters of Harley Frank.
[29]
On March 29, 1993, Mr. Justice Teitelbaum dealt, by telephone, with an application brought by Harley Frank seeking an injunction to suspend his purported dismissal by the Council, at the meeting of March 25, 1993, and to direct the councillors to desist from deposing or purporting to depose Harley Frank from his position as Chief. The affidavit, which Harley Frank filed, states that he had been deprived of secretarial services on the orders of the defendant councillors, his personal mail had been withheld, mail which had been addressed to him as Chief had been opened without his permission and he had been prevented, by the Council, from exercising his duties as Chief despite the court's order of March 19, 1993. Harley Frank expressed concern that despite the spending restrictions which had been placed on him, by the court order of March 19, 1993, none had been imposed on the councillors. He also noted:
"... I have seen a copy of the March 19, 1993 Order which has been altered in handwritten printing by adding the words 'band bylaw' in paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 of the Order so as to purport to indicate that the expression 'due process of law' would include a 'band bylaw'. Copies of the Order, an example of which is attached and marked Exhibit 'A', have been handed out by the Blood Tribe Administration to all its employees, thereby misleading unsophisticated readers into believing that the Order actually spoke of 'band bylaws' which of course it did not."
[30]
The order which was issued by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum on March 29, 1993 reads, in part:
"1. The removal of the plaintiff, Harley Frank as Chief, or his purported removal, be and is hereby suspended until Monday, June 21, 1993 or such later date as may be directed by this court for hearing of the plaintiff's application for an interlocutory injunction;
"2. The Council and any ad hoc faction thereof or group of Councillors be and they are hereby forbidden and enjoined from deposing or purporting to depose, or removing or purporting to remove Harley Frank, the Band Chief, until further order of this court, with any of the named parties hereto being at liberty to apply to this court by application, with short but proper notice, for advice and directions as to any such proposed action;
"3. The Chief, Harley Frank, be, and he is hereby forbidden and enjoined from deposing, or purporting to depose, or removing or purporting to remove the Council or any duly elected Councillor, until further order of this court, with any of the named parties hereto being at liberty to apply to this court by application, with short but proper notice, for advice and directions as to any such proposed action;
"4. In the event that the plaintiff fails to proceed with an application for an interlocutory injunction on Monday, June 21, 1993, or on such later date as may be directed by this court, then the interim injunction provisions set forth in paragraph 1 of this Order shall terminate;
"5. All persons, whether a party to this action or not, be and are hereby forbidden and enjoined from demonstrations in or in the vicinity of 100 feet of the Shot-Both-Sides Administration Building on the Reserve at Stand Off, Alberta;
. . . . .
"8. For the purposes of clarity, the Order of Mr. Justice Muldoon dated Friday, March 19, 1993 continues and remains in full force and effect."
[31]
Harley Frank called an open meeting for all band members, for April 1, a "Chief's Meeting". He called the meeting with a view to trying to explain to the members of the tribe what was going on. The councillors circulated notices which were handed out to school children. These stated that the meeting had not been sanctioned by the councillors and that neither the Council nor the staff of the Blood Tribe administration would be in attendance at the meeting. The notices also said that the Council would not be responsible should any unruly occurrences arise at the meeting.
[32]
The Council circulated a newsletter, a "Special Report for Members of the Blood Tribe - Kainaiwa", containing a recitation therein of the accusations they were making against Harley Frank. In his third affidavit filed in this court, Harley Frank described the actions of Council as the waging of a propaganda war against him which was "proving to be very divisive within the tribe". He also noted that "The allegations are without substance and have been fully explained by myself to the Council on numerous occasions." That affidavit continues:
"13. Council continues to interfere with my ability to conduct the day-to-day business of Chief. For example, notwithstanding the Order of Mr. Justice Muldoon, limiting my spending power to $25 per day, excluding Sundays, the Council removed all signing authority for myself with respect to cheques, financial transactions and Federal Government agreements. The Council has also suspended my tribal Visa card. In this way the Council has reduced the spending power authorized by Justice Muldoon to nothing.
. . . . .
"19. The Council has further denied me access to secretarial and office assistance such that the work of the Chief's office cannot be done. On a day-to-day basis I am forced to attend to trivial matters and chores that should be the responsibility of support staff. With the exception of one secretary who is willing to lend support to me when she is able, I have had to turn to volunteers who provided support in the form of typing, phone calls and messages, photocopying and other basic office duties and tasks. Nearly all of my office work has had to be performed out of my home. It has been necessary for me to personally finance long distance calls, stationery and other routine office expenses.
"20. When he granted his Order, Justice Muldoon did not see fit to place any restrictions on the spending power of the Council members. ... It is becoming increasingly apparent that whichever party has control of the tribal funds will ultimately prevail in this litigation.
. . . . .
"34. I have found it impossible to obtain from the Council or Mr. Wilton Goodstriker, any information respecting personnel matters, financial statements and project development. Mr. Goodstriker has continued to work exclusively with the Council and has prevented me from gaining access to information that is required by myself to exercise the duties and responsibilities of Chief.
"35. I have similarly received no cooperation from Mr. Eugene Creighton, the tribal solicitor. Again, Mr. Creighton has worked exclusively with the Council in their efforts to remove me from office. ..."
[33]
On April 2, the Council held a special meeting at the Sandman Inn in Lethbridge. The resolutions which record the decisions taken at that meeting are:
"... the motion of March 29, 1993 is hereby rescinded, which states: moved that we reaffirm our decision made on Thursday, March 25, 1993 that we have removed Chief Harley Frank and that we proceed with the bi-election of a new Head Chief for the Blood Tribe until such time we are served with the new court injunction. ..."
and
"... Council will continue with the process of removing Harley Frank from the Office of Chief in accordance with the
Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
and the Federal Court Orders and that instructions be given to our lawyers that the Court Orders be appealed and that contempt proceedings against Harley Frank be commenced immediately based upon his actions to date. All in favour. Carried Unanimously."
[34]
On April 2, 1993, a draft notice of motion was filed with the court by Harley Frank seeking a show cause order why the councillors should not be found in contempt of the orders of March 19 and March 29. It was alleged that a nomination meeting for the election of a new Chief was scheduled for April 6 and a by-election for April 29. On April 5, 1993, this motion was adjourned sine die by Mr. Justice Muldoon.
[35]
On April 20, 1993, Harley Frank attended a regularly scheduled meeting of Council which the Chief usually chairs. The court had ordered the two parties to work together. Harley Frank did not attempt to take the chair but allowed Randy Bottle to do so. Some of the Chief's supporters also attended the meeting. The meeting turned into a brouhaha.
[36]
On April 29, the defendant councillors filed a motion for a show cause order to require Harley Frank to answer why he should not be found in contempt of the orders of March 19 and March 29, for an injunction preventing the plaintiff from disrupting Council meetings and for advice and direction from the court respecting the removal of Harley Frank from his position as Chief pursuant to the amended
Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
. Counsel for the defendants also wrote to the court urging that the defendants' motion of April 29 be heard on an urgent basis and not deferred to June 21 as there was "a need for the elected Council, with or without the cooperation of the Chief, to get on with the pressing business of the Blood Tribe". On May 4, 1993 another person who supported Harley Frank was dismissed by Council from her job with the administration.
[37]
The plaintiff, subsequently, filed a motion seeking the reinstatement of the employees who had been dismissed from the administration, the appointment of a third party financial manager, the issuance of a show cause order requiring the defendants to answer why they should not be found in contempt of the orders of March 19 and March 29. An order was sought to place limitations on the defendant councillors spending powers as well as an order directing that a reference be held into the proper and lawful division of power and authority between the Chief and Council as it has been settled by tribal customs.
[38]
These two motions came on for hearing before Mr. Justice Joyal on May 19, 1993 in Vancouver. A perusal of the transcript of that hearing indicates that Mr. Justice Joyal was not sanguine about the ability of the court to make effective orders to ameliorate the situation. It is clear he was contemplating ordering the appointment of a third party trustee or manager of the affairs of the tribe until the underlying issues (e.g., a determination of the respective authority of the Chief and Council) could be made.
[39]
Chief Harley Frank, in his affidavit, which had been filed for the proceedings, stated "I am prepared to stand for reelection with the Council, if so directed by the court". The defendant councillors were all present in court, in Vancouver, when the motions before Mr. Justice Joyal were heard. Harley Frank was not there. His counsel indicated that this was because of the travel and accommodation expenses involved. The defendant councillors, through their counsel, suggested to Mr. Justice Joyal on May 19, 1993, that both the Chief and the Council would immediately go to the people in a new election to solve the situation. I note particularly that the defendant councillors suggested this resolution of the dispute to the court and agreed to it.
[40]
Mr. Justice Joyal did not issue an order immediately since the settling of its exact terms with counsel was required. A telephone conference for that purpose was held on May 26, 1993. Mr. Justice Joyal on that date circulated the following draft order to counsel for all the parties:
"The parties have agreed following the hearing of the motion in Vancouver followed by a teleconference, that the issues between the contending parties may best be resolved by the holding of a referendum.
"The parties further agreed, through counsel, that they will strive to establish a code of procedure respecting the holding of this referendum and with or without the further intervention of this court the procedure will be set out in a further Order of the court.
"Counsel have agreed further to enjoin all the parties with respect to their continued responsibilities and obligations of their respective offices to conduct themselves with propriety and civility and at all times their conduct should reflect the level of trust which the members of the band have caused to expect from their elected representatives.
"In the meantime, I (Joyal, J.) remain seized of the case."
[41]
On May 27, 1993, the Council passed the following resolution:
"WHEREAS, the Council of the Blood Tribe have called a Special Council meeting at 7:00 p.m., Wednesday, May 26, 1993 to address the Federal Court of Canada Order in the matter or the Chief and the Blood Tribe Council and,
"WHEREAS, the Council of the Blood Tribe have in consultation with a cross section of the membership of the Blood Tribe this date and
"WHEREAS, the Council of the Blood Tribe has, in caucus, this date, carefully deliberated the outcome of the Federal Court hearing held in Vancouver, B.C., on Wednesday, May 19, 1993, presided over by the Honourable Mr. Justice Joyal and overheard by legal counsel, Mr. P.R.S. Leveque and Mr. Chris Evans as well as Mr. Bottle et al., regarding the terms and conditions of the orders of Mr. Justice Muldoon and Mr. Justice Teitelbaum on March 19th and 29th, 1993 respectively and,
"WHEREAS, the Blood Tribe Council has acted and continue to act in the best interests of the Blood Tribe membership by following 'due process of law' - Blood Tribal law, as prescribed in the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Elections Bylaws
and,
"WHEREAS, we the Blood Tribe Council desire to exercise our sovereignty and inherent right over our customs and traditions and in particular the process of electing and removing elected officials without interference from authorities outside the jurisdiction of the Blood Indian Reserve #148 and,
. . . . .
"WHEREAS, the Council of the Blood Tribe deems that the court orders as unconstitutional pursuant to our constitution as declared in Kainayssinin by the Elders of the Blood Tribe and as ratified by the members of the Blood Tribe as their law and therefore violates our political, inherent, and treaty rights that are protected by the
Constitution Act of 1982
and,
"WHEREAS, the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Election Bylaws
have been recognized under the
Indian Act
provisions as a duly executed Federal law and,
"WHEREAS, the Executive Coordinator has received a petition containing signatures in excess of 1,300 members for the removal of Harley Frank from the Office of Chief and said petition having been filed with the Council of the Tribe duly conforms to the
Amended Blood Tribe Custom Elections Bylaws
and the Blood Tribe's jurisdiction in selecting its elected officials and now,
"THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the Blood Tribe Council proceed with charges against Harley Frank under the
Indian Act
of s. 2(3)(b) and that instructions be given to our Legal Department and Chris Evans to proceed with these actions, and further that we reaffirm our decision made on Thursday, March 25, 1993 that we have removed Chief Harley Frank and that we proceed with the bi-election of a new Head Chief for the Blood Tribe and further,
"THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the Executive Coordinator be instructed to proceed with due process and the procedures necessary to bring this petition to its final conclusion."
[42]
On June 1, 1993 the Council scheduled a nomination meeting, for the putting forward of names for the position of Head Chief. This was to be held on June 8, 1993, with an election to follow on June 30, 1993.
[43]
On June 7, 1993, Mr. Justice Joyal issued the following order:
"UPON MOTION dated the 14th day of May 1993, on behalf of the plaintiff, and upon hearing what was said by counsel at the hearing held in Vancouver on May 19, 1993 and at a further telephone conference hearing on May 26, 1993 and again on June 7, 1993;
"WHEREAS there is a wide division of opinion between the Chief of the Blood Band and the members of its Council on the principles of governance of the Band's affairs; and
"WHEREAS these clashes of opinion have reached the level of personality conflicts pitting Chief and Council members in a series of struggles for control of the Band's affairs and have resulted in actions or conduct by each side which are interpreted as vexatious, provocative and inflammatory; and
. . . . .
"WHEREAS it is found that such a standard of conduct has been deemed wanting with respect to all of them and that it is incumbent upon this court to assure that the said ground rules are to be respected in this formal enunciation as well as in the unbounded and evident spirit of it; and
"WHEREAS the parties have now agreed that the best means of resolving their differences and of assuring some return to stability in the conduct of the affairs of the Band entrusted to the parties is by way of a referendum to determine the degree of Band membership support enjoyed by either or both factions;
"IT IS HEREBY ORDERED AS FOLLOWS:
1. Except as otherwise herein provided and except as to inconsistencies arising therefrom the terms and conditions of the orders of Mr. Justice Muldoon and Mr. Justice Teitelbaum, dated March 19, 1993 and March 29, 1993 respectively, are hereby confirmed and restated and shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Order.
2. The agreement consensually arrived at on May 19, 1993 and confirmed on May 26, 1993 respecting the holding of a referendum as aforesaid is hereby made an Order of this court.
3. It is further ordered that the defendants, until further order of this court, be prohibited from taking further action with respect to the Band Council's resolutions purportedly adopted on May 27, 1993 calling for a by-election for a Chief of the Band, and for the putting in motion of the procedures under art. 11 of the Band's Bylaws.
4. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as reflecting on the validity of any provision of the Band's Bylaws respecting the holding of by-elections. The orders herein contained are to assure that the agreement freely and voluntarily reached on May 19, 1993 by all defendants present in court in Vancouver, B.C., and fully confirmed by counsel on May 26, 1993 is fully respected and followed.
5. The parties, with the assistance of their respective counsel, shall ensure the fairness of the terms, conditions and procedures relating to the aforementioned referendum and shall submit a draft thereof within eight days of this date for the court's approval and endorsement. ..."
[44]
On June 16, 1993, Mr. Justice Joyal issued another order:
"Upon an application by counsel for an order or direction of this court respecting the decision of the defendants collectively known as the Band Council to hold a by-election for the election of a new Chief of the Blood Band and not to hold a referendum as ordered by this court on June 7, 1993;
"Upon hearing Counsel for the incumbent Chief of the Band and upon hearing Counsel for the defendant Band council members; and
"Upon hearing Counsel for the defendant Wayne Hamby; and
"Upon considering what was argued by Counsel with respect to any disposition this court might make relative to the impasse between the said Chief and the said members of the Band Council.
"IT IS ORDERED:
1. That the defendant Wayne Hamby be hereby made a Third Party to the proceedings and the above style of cause be amended accordingly.
2. That the terms of participation of the said Third Party shall be consonant with the third party's duties, responsibilities and authority to maintain peace and order on the Blood Band Reserve and that his counsel be accorded presence in this court accordingly.
3. That the order of this court of June 7, 1993, be reconfirmed and restated.
"No further order or direction of this court is warranted at this time."
[45]
On June 21, 1993, at the commencement of the hearing of the interlocutory injunction in this matter, Mr. Justice MacKay continued the March 29, 1993 order of Mr. Justice Teitelbaum. On June 22, 1993 Randy Bottle wrote to Harley Frank informing him that a petition seeking his removal (supra, para. [14]) had been received received and that that petition now carried the signatures of over one-third of the eligible voters of the Blood Tribe. Harley Frank was therefore instructed to attend a meeting to be held on June 28, 1993 to answer the allegations of the petition. In evidence, Harley Frank noted that it was his understanding that some of the signatures to the petition had been obtained by threatening the nonpayment of social security cheques to the individuals, other signatures were of individuals who were not eligible voters and at least one was the name of a person who was dead.
[46]
After hearing the application for an interlocutory injunction, on June 21, 22 and 23, Mr. Justice MacKay issued an order on June 25, 1993 which reads in part:
"UPON hearing in Calgary, Alberta, on June 21, 22 and 23, 1993, submissions of counsel for the parties, including the Third Party, in relation to an application by the plaintiff for an interlocutory injunction and related orders in relation to an Order of Mr. Justice Teitelbaum, made the 29th day of March, 1993 granting the relief sought, on terms, until Monday, June 21, 1993 and upon Order made June 21, 1993, continuing the application of the Order of March 29, 1993 pending further Order of this court;
"UPON consideration of the Orders made by this court on March 19, 1993 by Muldoon, J., on March 29, 1993 by Teitelbaum, J., on June 7 and June 16, 1993 by Joyal, J., and consideration of submissions of counsel at the hearing in Calgary;
"UPON noting it is recited in the Order of Mr. Justice Muldoon made March 19, 1993, that the parties, plaintiff and defendants, by their respective counsel invoked the provisions of the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5, and this court's jurisdiction in regard thereto;
"UPON noting that previous orders of this court in attempting to establish basic rules for the conduct of the parties pending the hearing of this application in Calgary are perceived by the respective parties not to have been scrupulously followed by the opposing party;
"UPON noting it is recited in the Order by Mr. Justice Joyal made June 7, 1993 that at one time the parties agreed that the best means of resolving their differences and of assuring some return to stability in the conduct of affairs of the Blood Tribe, entrusted to the parties by election of the Tribe, is by way of a referendum and that the parties have been directed to submit to the court a draft of the terms, conditions and procedures that might be approved and endorsed by the court; and
"UPON review of the terms of all previous orders of the court in this matter, and after consideration of submissions by counsel for the plaintiff and counsel for the Third Party (counsel for the defendants having declined to make submissions) concerning the terms of any Order this court might make; and upon concluding that, for the convenience of the parties and others concerned as well as the court, it is appropriate to consolidate the general terms of previous orders now amended in light of conditions prevailing at this date, as terms of this Order;
O R D E R
"IT IS HEREBY ORDERED:
1. Chief Harley Frank and the defendants as members of the Band Council remain in the offices to which they were duly elected unless he resigns or they resign by his or their own free will or are removed by due process of law consistent with the terms of this Order, and
(a) the removal of the plaintiff, Harley Frank, as Chief, or his purported removal, be and is hereby suspended until Tuesday, November 2, 1993 or such later date as may be directed by this court for hearing a renewed application by the plaintiff for an interlocutory or interim injunction,
(b) The defendants as Councillors and any faction or group thereof be and they are hereby forbidden and enjoined from deposing or purporting to depose, or removing or purporting to remove Harley Frank as Chief, until further order of this court, with any of the named parties hereto being at liberty to apply to this court by application, with short but proper notice, for advice and directions as to any such proposed action; and for greater certainty the defendants as Councillors are prohibited from taking further action with respect to the resolutions purportedly adopted on May 27, 1993 calling for a by-election for a Chief of the Band, and for the putting in motion of the procedures under art. 11 of the
Tribe's Custom Election Bylaws
;
(c) The Chief, Harley Frank, be, and he is hereby forbidden and enjoined from deposing, or purporting to depose, or removing or purporting to remove the Council or any duly elected Councillor, until further order of this court, with any of the named parties hereto being at liberty to apply to this court by application, with short but proper notice, for advice and directions as to any such proposed action;
(d) No person purporting to hold office as Chief or as a Councillor by virtue of any purported by-election process carried on in contravention of clauses 1(b) or 1(c) of this Order shall be recognized for lawful purposes as such office holder pending further order of this court, but if there be any such person claiming office by reason of any such process he or she is at liberty to apply to this court by application, with short but proper notice, for directions.
. . . . .
8. The plaintiff, Chief Harley Frank, continues, in accord with the Order of Mr. Justice Muldoon of March 19, 1993, to be forbidden and enjoined from acting in the name of the Council apart from the Council in meeting or assembly duly called. He shall be entitled to incur expenses, or to be reimbursed for expenses personally incurred, in relation to the normal functions of the office of the Chief, upon proper justification for such expenses, as in the case of any member of Council in relation to expenses incurred in the normal functions of the office of Councillor. The Chief shall also be entitled to support by general services and facilities in the same manner as members of Council. Expenses, services and facilities provided for the plaintiff shall be reasonably consistent with functions of the office of Chief as those functions may be evident from the records of the Tribe."
[47]
Harley Frank did not attend the June 28, 1993 meeting, given the orders of the court, he did not consider it to be lawful. Council members appeared on Lethbridge television on June 29, to publicize and justify the election which was to be held on June 30. Council proceeded with the election on that date and Roy Fox was purportedly elected Chief. Roy Fox acted as Chief until the hearing of these contempt proceedings. Harley Frank was denied the payment of any proper expenses he might incur as Chief including the $25 per day which had been ordered by Mr. Justice Muldoon in March of 1993.
[48]
The Council refused to have any dealings with Harley Frank as Chief and recognized Mr. Fox as such instead. Harley Frank was refused admission to the administration building, not paid the regular salary of the office of Chief, was unable to obtain secretarial or other support required to conduct the office of Chief. In an affidavit, sworn on September 1, 1993, filed in support of continuation of the court injunction which was still in effect, Mr. Frank stated:
"7. It is my sincere wish and desire to meet with the Council and resolve the differences between us. I will entertain any proposal for settlement of these differences they wish to make. Previously, the Council had proposed a referendum be held in which the confidence of the tribal members in each since of the dispute would be put to a popular vote. Though I had misgivings about this procedure, I agreed to participate in the referendum.
"8. Once I agreed to this procedure and communicated my assent to this Honourable Court, the Council immediately reversed its position and indicated it would no longer go along with a referendum and declared a by-election for the Office of Chief.
"9. I have proposed a general election to the Council on several occasions as a means of resolving our differences. In an effort to settle the matter, I instructed my solicitors to write to the Council expressing my desire to mediate or otherwise resolve this matter, perhaps through the means of a general election. A copy of the letter transmitted to the defendants is attached hereto as Exhibit 'A'.
"10. Neither myself nor my solicitors have received any response to this correspondence. The defendants have not been forthcoming with any proposal to settle the matter and are apparently content to proceed with their business and the business of the Blood Tribe without concern for the Orders of this Honourable Court."
[49]
It is not difficult to see why all 12 defendants were found in contempt of various orders of this court.
[50]
Harley Frank, to his credit, did not ask that the court impose severe penalties against the defendants (such as a period of incarceration or a substantial fine). He did not even ask that they pay their own legal expenses instead of having these paid from band funds. He asked that the dispute be referred back to the electors of the tribe for resolution. The court, of course, is not bound by recommendations on sentencing that a defendant might suggest. Nevertheless, in the present situation, the recommendations seemed eminently sensible.
[51]
This court has indicated, throughout, that the dispute in question is one with respect to which it is very difficult for a court to make a meaningful resolution.
[52]
Mr. Justice Joyal, last May, indicated that a resolution by an alternative process was desirable. Mr. Justice MacKay, in June, urged the adoption of an alternative dispute resolution process:
"One process for resolving differences, resort to this court and its processes, has now been engaged. That is an expensive and time consuming process for resolution of differences, and it is not always the most appropriate process. ...
"I would urge the parties, through their representatives, to consider thoroughly the possibility of resolution of differences through the process of mediation, conciliation, arbitration or analogous procedures involving a third party or parties chosen by an agreed process. I would be surprised if within the Blood Tribe itself there is not long experience with processes of settling differences. Perhaps the Elders of the Tribe may play a significant role in this."
[53]
Both sides called upon the court to resolve the issues in this dispute in their favour. This was not a situation in which only the plaintiff sought the assistance of the court. It was therefore very unfair to attempt to characterize Harley Frank's initiatives in that regard as somehow denigrating the authority of the tribe. Both sides called upon the assistance of the court because there was no dispute resolution mechanism in place, except for one which made the accusers also the judge.
[54]
It is always difficult to choose a dispute resolution mechanism after a dispute is full blown. One cannot help but think that had there been a dispute resolution mechanism available to the parties, which could have been invoked at an early stage of this particular dispute, a lot of destructive and expensive activity might have been forestalled. One can speculate on mechanisms which might be considered: one that comes to mind is of course the appointment of an arbitrator (elder) by each side, which arbitrators (elders) in turn choose a third arbitrator or (elder) to join with them as the decision makers.
[55]
I would not presume to tell the parties what type of dispute resolution mechanism is appropriate but I do urge upon them that there is a need to consider and adopt a dispute resolution mechanism to deal with these kind of disputes when they arise.
[56]
In any event, in the present case, I indicated that if certain actions were undertaken, including an immediate general election for both Chief and Council, that I would accept these as a purging of the contempt. I have been advised that the actions, which it was agreed, on February 16, 1994, would be undertaken have been effected. Accordingly, I will not impose any penalty or demand any further requirement of the defendants.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]