 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 868)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
O'Keefe, J.
August 14, 2013.
Counsel:
David Matas, for the applicant;
Dhara Drew, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
David Matas, Winnipeg, Manitoba, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
O'Keefe, J.
: This is an application pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (the Act) for judicial review of a decision of an immigration officer (the officer) dated February 24, 2012, wherein the applicant's permanent residence application was refused. The officer's decision was based on the finding that the applicant was not credible in his claim and thus, the applicant has no well-founded fear of persecution in Ethiopia.
[2]
The applicant requests that the officer's decision be set aside and the application be referred for redetermination by a different officer.
Background
[3]
The applicant and his wife are citizens of Ethiopia, currently in Djibouti.
[4]
The applicant alleges that before fleeing Ethiopia, he was admitted to the department of engineering at the university in Jimma. He claims that during his first week of classes, violence broke out at the school and one student of Tigrea ancestry was killed.
[5]
The applicant claims that he was involved in a youth organization in high school that raised the ire of the Ethiopian government. Thus, the Ethiopian authorities suspected the applicant of being the perpetrator of violence on campus. The applicant claims that this resulted in his detention and torture at Hurrso military camp. The government also accused him of being a part of an Oromo youth organization.
[6]
Fearing for his life, he fled to Djibouti, where he is a refugee. He seeks refugee protection in Canada.
[7]
The applicant is married and claims to have cohabited with his wife prior to their marriage.
[8]
Their applications are sponsored by the Anglican Diocese of Rupert's Land in Winnipeg.
Officer's Decision
[9]
In a letter dated February 24, 2012, the officer informed the applicant that his application had been rejected.
[10]
The officer noted that the applicant attended the interview with the assistance of an interpreter fluent in English and Oromo and then canvassed the relevant legislation, including section 96 of the Act and sections 139 and 145 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227.
[11]
The officer was not satisfied that the applicant and his spouse were members of any of the classes prescribed by paragraph 139(1)(e) of the Regulations. The officer found that the applicant provided vague and conflicting answers in response to questions about his arrest, release and reasons for being unable to return to Ethiopia. The officer also doubted the authenticity of the applicant's documents. The officer also noted that he had provided the applicant with an opportunity to respond to the officer's concerns, but that the responses did not change his decision. The officer maintained that the applicant was not credible, nor did he have a well-founded fear of persecution in Ethiopia.
[12]
The officer also considered whether the applicant fit under the country of asylum classes, but that the applicant did "not meet the requirements of this class either."
[13]
In conclusion, the officer found that the applicant and his spouse did not meet the requirements of the Act and Regulations and thus the application was refused.
Issues
[14]
The applicant submits that the following points are at issue:
1. Can an adverse credibility finding based on mistakes about what is to be found on the record before the visa officer survive judicial review?
2. Was the duty of fairness respected by the visa officer who rejected the validity of official documents provided by the applicant without giving the applicant an adequate opportunity to respond to the concerns of the visa officer?
3. Is it proper for a visa officer to find a couple lacked credibility because they told the visa officer that they lived together without being married?
4. Did the visa officer err by failing to address the feared risk from the perspective of the feared agent of persecution?
[15]
I would rephrase the issues as follows:
1. What is the standard of review?
2. Did the officer err with respect to the applicants's involvement in the youth group at university?
3. Did the officer err in his decision relating to the falsity of the documents?
4. Was the officer's finding of a lack of credibility due to the applicant's testimony that he and his wife lived together before they were married which was not appropriate in their culture?
5. Did the officer err in asking the applicant why the government was pursuing him?
Applicant's Written Submissions
Erroneous Findings of Fact: The Youth Group Involvement
[16]
The applicant canvassed the CAIPS notes from the interview and found that the officer erroneously found that the applicant had contradicted himself. The officer found that the story the applicant told in the interview did not match the information in the application.
[17]
The applicant argues that his story in the interview is identical to the story he presented in his written application. The officer believed the applicant was a part of a youth organization in university, but the applicant insists he never stated this. The applicant's counsel asks "what could have possibly led the visa officer to state that the applicant was part of a youth organization at a university?".
Procedural Fairness: The ONARS Papers
[18]
The applicant submitted official identity documents from the government of Djibouti's "Office National d'Assistance aux Réfugiés et Sinistrés." (ONARS). The officer stated that these were "altered documents" and that the documents were "fake".
[19]
The applicant admits that the documents appear to be altered, but that he was unaware of the alterations until the officer pointed them out. The applicant submits that the officer could have checked with ONARS whether the documents were reliable or not, but the officer did not do so.
[20]
The applicant canvassed jurisprudence to argue that visa officers are not experts in foreign documents. He submits that procedural fairness requires either that the officer check with ONARS for the legitimacy of the documents or that the applicant have an opportunity to provide further documentation from ONARS. The failure to do either is an error on the part of the officer.
Credibility: The Marriage
[21]
The applicant argues that the officer erred in his negative credibility finding based on the story the applicant shared of his living arrangements with his wife prior to their marriage.
[22]
The officer asked, "is it not inappropriate in your culture for a woman and man to live together in one room without being married?" The officer wrote in his notes that "I have concerns as the story included material facts that lacked detail ... were simply implausible considering common knowledge of customs from the region" (i.e. the fact that he and his wife purportedly resided together unmarried for an extended period of time).
[23]
The applicant argues that he had given a reasonable explanation of why he and his wife had not married and that a negative credibility finding on this point is perverse.
Persecutor Perspective
[24]
The applicant argues that the officer erred by asking the applicant to speculate on why the authorities might be motivated to persecute him and by failing to consider how the applicant would have been perceived by his persecutors in Ethiopia.
Respondent's Written Submissions
[25]
The respondent submits that the officer made a reasonable credibility finding, made reasonable implausibility findings, did not breach the applicant's right to procedural fairness and reasonably determined that the applicant faced no risk of persecution if he were to be removed to his home country.
Credibility
[26]
The respondent argues that notwithstanding the officer's mistake about the applicant's involvement in youth organizations, the credibility finding still stands. The respondent argues that the mistake was immaterial and that once corrected, the officer did not pursue the matter any further. Indeed, the officer made no credibility finding on this point, but instead focused his credibility findings on other points: the applicant's false documents and vague answers.
Credibility Finding was Based on Unreasonable Implausibility
[27]
The respondent argues that visa officers are free to consider general customs within a culture and apply them to particular circumstances when assessing an application. The officer reasonably did so in this case. He found that it was implausible that the applicant and his wife would have lived together prior to marriage, as this is not normally the conduct of unmarried people in Ethiopia and Djibouti.
[28]
Furthermore, the respondent argues that the officer's implausibility finding was not based on this point alone. The officer also considered that the applicant provided vague and confusing answers.
No Breach of Duty of Fairness
[29]
The officer had no obligation to inquire with ONARS and the Court about the validity of documents. The officer found that the documents were altered and that the applicant provided no satisfactory answer as to why this was so. The respondent said at paragraph 38 of his submissions that: "The handwritten changes to the dates were clear evidence that the documents were not valid foreign government-issued documents." The respondent submits that, contrary to the applicant's claim, the officer provided the applicant with several opportunities to provide explanations for the changes on the documents.
No Risk of Persecution
[30]
The officer's question about the perspective of the authorities was intended to get more information about the applicant's situation and not to get into the mind of the persecutor as the applicant argues. The officer considered all the evidence before him and reasonably found that the applicant had no well-founded fear of persecution.
Applicant's Further Written Submissions
[31]
The applicant replies that if the officer did not base his decision on the error, he should have submitted an affidavit to that effect. Instead, a close reading of the reasons shows that the mistakes were a basis for the decision. Given that the erroneous findings formed the basis of the officer's decision, they were prejudicial to the applicant.
[32]
The applicant replies that the officer made no plausibility findings on the documentary evidence before it. Rather, the respondent invites the Court to make plausibility findings, which is not the function of the Court.
[33]
With respect to whether the applicant and his wife lived together prior to their marriage, the officer erred by failing to distinguish between cultural norms and individual behaviour. Evidence of deviation from a cultural norm can never be the proper basis for questioning credibility.
[34]
The applicant replies that he has a well-founded fear of persecution.
Respondent's Further Written Submissions
[35]
The respondent further submits much the same points as were present in its original submissions but with more discussion on the factual basis for such arguments, as well as voicing its disagreement with the applicant's arguments.
Analysis and Decision
Issue 1
What is the appropriate standard of review?
[36]
Where previous jurisprudence has determined the standard of review applicable to a particular issue before the court, the reviewing court may adopt that standard (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[37]
Decisions on applications for permanent residence visas as members of the humanitarian protected persons abroad class and the Convention refugees abroad class are to be measured against a standard of reasonableness (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). A visa officer's findings of fact, as well as credibility findings are to be reviewed against the same standard (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[38]
The allegation of a breach of the duty of fairness is an issue of procedural fairness and thus, is to be measured against a standard of correctness (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[39]
In reviewing the officer's decision on the standard of reasonableness, the Court should not intervene unless the officer came to a conclusion that is not transparent, justifiable and intelligible and within the range of acceptable outcomes based on the evidence before it (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 47 and
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). As the Supreme Court held in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, it is not up to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome, nor is it the function of the reviewing court to reweigh the evidence (at paragraph 59).
[40]
In reviewing the officer's decision on the standard of correctness, this Court will show no deference. Rather, this Court will substitute its own view and provide the correct answer (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 50).
Issue 2
Did the officer err with respect to the applicant's involvement in the youth group at university?
[41]
The respondent concedes the officer made a mistake with respect to the applicant's involvement in a youth group while at university. I agree with the respondent that the mistake was not material to the decision.
Issue 3
Did the officer err in his decision relating to the falsity of the documents?
[42]
The officer found that some of the applicant's documents were not genuine because they were photocopies and dates had been changed. The applicant stated that the documents were the documents the authorities gave to him or his representative. The officer did not attempt to verify the documents nor did the officer give the applicant the opportunity to verify the documents in question. Based on the facts of this case, I am of the view that a breach of procedural fairness resulted.
Issue 4
Was the officer's finding of a lack of credibility due to the applicant's testimony that he and his wife lived together before they were married which was not appropriate in their culture?
[43]
Basically, the officer found it was implausible that the applicant and his now wife would have lived together before they were married since the customs of their country deem this to be inappropriate. This implausibility finding was used as a basis to find the applicant not credible. I am not satisfied that such an implausibility finding should have been made based on the evidence in this case. The applicant and his wife could have decided to live together before marriage (as they stated) despite the customs of their country.
Issue 5
Did the officer err in asking the applicant why the government was pursuing him?
[44]
I agree with the applicant that the applicant would not necessarily know whey the government was after him. He gave answers as to why he thought the government was after him. In my view, this was the most the applicant could be expected to do based on the evidence in this case. If the applicant's lack of knowledge of the reasons why he was being pursued was used to make a non-credibility finding, this would be unreasonable.
[45]
For all of the above reasons, I believe that the officer's decision was unreasonable and that there was as well, a breach of the duty of procedural fairness.
[46]
The application for judicial review is therefore allowed and the matter is referred to a different officer for redetermination.
[47]
Neither party wished to submit a proposed serious question of general importance for my consideration for certification.
JUDGMENT
[48]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application for judicial review is allowed and the matter is referred to a different officer for redetermination.
ANNEX
Relevant Statutory Provisions
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27
11. (1) A foreign national must, before entering Canada, apply to an officer for a visa or for any other document required by the regulations. The visa or document may be issued if, following an examination, the officer is satisfied that the foreign national is not inadmissible and meets the requirements of this Act.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
11. (1) L'étranger doit, préalablement à son entrée au Canada, demander à l'agent les visa et autres documents requis par règlement. L'agent peut les délivrer sur preuve, à la suite d'un contrôle, que l'étranger n'est pas interdit de territoire et se conforme à la présente loi.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227
139. (1) A permanent resident visa shall be issued to a foreign national in need of refugee protection, and their accompanying family members, if following an examination it is established that
. . .
(e) the foreign national is a member of one of the classes prescribed by this Division
145. A foreign national is a Convention refugee abroad and a member of the Convention refugees abroad class if the foreign national has been determined, outside Canada, by an officer to be a Convention refugee.
139. (1) Un visa de résident permanent est délivré à l'étranger qui a besoin de protection et aux membres de sa famille qui l'accompagnent si, à l'issue d'un contrôle, les éléments suivants sont établis:
. . .
e) il fait partie d'une catégorie établie dans la présente section
145. Est un réfugié au sens de la Convention outre-frontières et appartient à la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de cette convention l'étranger à qui un agent a reconnu la qualité de réfugié alors qu'il se trouvait hors du Canada
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la Loi), qui vise la décision datée du 24 février 2012 rendue par un agent d'immigration (l'agent), par laquelle la demande de résidence permanente du demandeur a été rejetée. La décision de l'agent était fondée sur la conclusion selon laquelle la demande du demandeur n'était pas crédible et que, par conséquent, il n'avait pas de crainte fondée de persécution en Éthiopie.
[2]
Le demandeur souhaite que la décision de l'agent soit infirmée et que la demande soit renvoyée pour nouvel examen par un autre agent.
Le contexte
[3]
Le demandeur et son épouse sont citoyens de l'Éthiopie, et ils résident actuellement à Djibouti.
[4]
Le demandeur soutient qu'avant de s'enfuir de l'Éthiopie, il avait été admis au département d'ingénierie à l'université de Jimma. Il déclare que, pendant la première semaine de cours, des violences ont éclaté à l'école et un étudiant d'origine tigréenne a été tué.
[5]
Le demandeur soutient qu'il a fait partie d'un groupe jeunesse à l'école secondaire qui avait soulevé la colère du gouvernement éthiopien. Par conséquent, les autorités éthiopiennes avaient soupçonné le demandeur d'avoir été l'auteur des violences sur le campus. Le demandeur soutient que cela a entraîné sa détention au camp militaire d'Hurrso, où il a été torturé. Le gouvernement l'a aussi accusé d'être membre d'un groupe jeunesse Oromo.
[6]
Craignant pour sa vie, il s'est enfui à Djibouti, où il est un réfugié. Il revendique le statut de réfugié au Canada.
[7]
Le demandeur est marié et il a déclaré qu'il avait cohabité avec son épouse avant leur mariage.
[8]
Leurs demandes sont parrainées par le diocèse anglican de Rupert's Land à Winnipeg.
La décision de l'agent
[9]
Dans une lettre datée du 24 février 2012, l'agent a avisé le demandeur que sa demande avait été rejetée.
[10]
L'agent a noté que le demandeur s'était présenté à l'entrevue accompagné d'un interprète qui parlait couramment l'anglais et l'oromo, et l'agent a ensuite examiné les dispositions légales pertinentes, y compris l'article 96 de la Loi et les articles 139 et 145 du
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2002-227 (le Règlement).
[11]
L'agent n'était pas convaincu que le demandeur et son épouse étaient membres d'une des catégories décrites à l'alinéa 139(1)
e
) du Règlement. L'agent a conclu que le demandeur avait donné des réponses vagues et contradictoires aux questions au sujet de son arrestation, de sa libération et des raisons pour lesquelles il ne pouvait pas retourner en Éthiopie. L'agent doutait aussi de l'authenticité des documents du demandeur. L'agent a aussi noté qu'il avait donné au demandeur l'occasion de répondre à ses préoccupations, mais que les réponses du demandeur n'avaient pas changé sa décision. L'agent a maintenu que le demandeur n'était pas crédible et qu'il n'avait pas une crainte fondée de persécution en Éthiopie.
[12]
L'agent a aussi examiné si le demandeur relevait de la catégorie de personnes de pays d'accueil, mais il a conclu que le demandeur [traduction] « ne satisfait pas non plus aux exigences de cette catégorie ».
[13]
En conclusion, l'agent a conclu que le demandeur et son épouse ne satisfaisaient pas aux exigences de la Loi et du Règlement et, par conséquent, la demande a été rejetée.
Les questions en litige
[14]
Le demandeur soulève les questions suivantes:
1. Une conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité, qui est fondée sur des erreurs au sujet de ce qui se trouve dans le dossier dont l'agent des visas est saisi, peut-elle être maintenue en contrôle judiciaire?
2. L'agent des visas a-t-il respecté son obligation d'équité lorsqu'il a rejeté la validité de documents officiels fournis par le demandeur, sans donner à ce dernier l'occasion adéquate de répondre aux préoccupations de l'agent?
3. Est-il correct pour un agent des visas de conclure qu'un couple n'est pas crédible parce que les partenaires ont déclaré qu'ils habitaient ensemble avant de se marier?
4. L'agent des visas a-t-il commis une erreur en n'examinant pas la question du risque redouté par rapport au point de vue de l'agent de persécution craint?
[15]
La Cour reformule les questions en litige de la façon suivante:
1. Quelle est la norme de contrôle applicable?
2. L'agent des visas a-t-il commis une erreur en ce qui a trait à la participation du demandeur au groupe jeunesse à l'université?
3. L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur dans sa décision au sujet de la fausseté des documents?
4. La conclusion quant au manque de crédibilité que l'agent a tirée était-elle fondée sur le témoignage du demandeur selon lequel son épouse et lui avaient habité ensemble avant de se marier, ce qui était inapproprié dans leur culture?
5. L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur en demandant au demandeur pourquoi le gouvernement le poursuivait?
Les observations écrites du demandeur
Conclusion de fait erronée: la participation au groupe jeunesse
[16]
Le demandeur a examiné les notes du STIDI de l'entrevue et a remarqué que l'agent avait conclu de façon erronée que le demandeur s'était contredit. L'agent a conclu que le récit que le demandeur avait fait pendant son entrevue ne correspondait pas aux renseignements inscrits dans la demande.
[17]
Le demandeur soutient que le récit qu'il a fait pendant l'entrevue est identique à celui qu'il a présenté dans sa demande écrite. L'agent croyait que le demandeur avait fait partie d'un groupe jeunesse à l'université, mais le demandeur soutient qu'il n'a jamais fait une telle déclaration. L'avocat du demandeur demande [traduction] « qu'est-ce qui aurait possiblement pu porter l'agent des visas à déclarer que le demandeur avait fait partie d'un groupe jeunesse à l'université? ».
Équité procédurale: les documents de l'ONARS
[18]
Le demandeur a présenté des documents d'identité officiels du gouvernement de Djibouti provenant de l'Office National d'Assistance aux Réfugiés et Sinistrés (ONARS). L'agent a déclaré que ces documents étaient [traduction] « des documents modifiés » et qu'ils étaient [traduction] « des faux ».
[19]
Le demandeur reconnaît que les documents semblent avoir été modifiés, mais qu'il n'était pas conscient des modifications avant que l'agent ne les mentionne. Le demandeur soutient que l'agent aurait pu vérifier auprès de l'ONARS pour déterminer si les documents étaient fiables ou non, mais l'agent ne l'a pas fait.
[20]
Le demandeur a examiné la jurisprudence pour soutenir que les agents des visas ne sont pas des experts en documents étrangers. Il soutient que l'équité procédurale exige que l'agent vérifie auprès de l'ONARS pour confirmer l'authenticité des documents ou qu'il donne l'occasion au demandeur de fournir des renseignements supplémentaires provenant de l'ONARS. Le défaut de le faire constitue une erreur de la part de l'agent.
Crédibilité: le mariage
[21]
Le demandeur soutient que l'agent a commis une erreur en tirant des conclusions négatives quant à la crédibilité fondées sur le récit du demandeur selon lequel il avait habité avec son épouse avant leur mariage.
[22]
L'agent a demandé [traduction] « n'est-il pas inapproprié dans votre culture pour une femme et un homme d'habiter ensemble dans la même pièce sans être mariés? » L'agent a écrit dans ses notes: [traduction] « j'ai des préoccupations parce que le récit comprenait des faits importants qui n'étaient pas détaillés [...] et qui étaient simplement invraisemblables compte tenu des connaissances communes des coutumes de la région » (c'est-à-dire le fait que le demandeur et son épouse auraient habité ensemble pendant une période prolongée avant de se marier).
[23]
Le demandeur soutient qu'il a donné une explication raisonnable de la raison pour laquelle son épouse et lui n'étaient pas mariés et qu'une conclusion négative quant à la crédibilité à ce sujet était abusive.
Le point de vue du persécuteur
[24]
Le demandeur soutient que l'agent a commis une erreur en lui demandant de deviner la raison pour laquelle les autorités pouvaient vouloir le persécuter et en ne tenant pas compte de la façon dont le demandeur aurait été perçu par ses persécuteurs en Éthiopie.
Les observations écrites du défendeur
[25]
Le défendeur soutient que l'agent a tiré une conclusion raisonnable quant à la crédibilité, qu'il a tiré des conclusions raisonnables d'invraisemblance, qu'il n'a pas manqué au droit du demandeur à l'équité procédurale et qu'il a raisonnablement déterminé que le demandeur ne serait pas exposé à un risque de persécution s'il était renvoyé à son pays d'origine.
La crédibilité
[26]
Le défendeur soutient que, malgré l'erreur de l'agent au sujet de la participation du demandeur à un groupe jeunesse, la conclusion quant à la crédibilité tient toujours. Le défendeur soutient que l'erreur importe peu et qu'une fois qu'elle a été corrigée, l'agent n'a pas poursuivi la question. En effet, l'agent n'a tiré aucune conclusion de crédibilité à ce sujet, mais il a plutôt axé ses conclusions de crédibilité sur d'autres sujets: les faux documents du demandeur et les réponses vagues.
Les conclusions sur la crédibilité étaient fondées sur une question d'invraisemblance déraisonnable
[27]
Le défendeur soutient que les agents des visas peuvent tenir compte de la coutume générale dans la culture et l'appliquer aux circonstances particulières lorsqu'ils examinent une demande. C'est ce qu'a raisonnablement fait l'agent en l'espèce. Il a conclu qu'il était invraisemblable que le demandeur et son épouse aient habité ensemble avant d'être mariés, parce qu'il ne s'agit pas d'un comportement normal pour des gens qui ne sont pas mariés en Éthiopie et à Djibouti.
[28]
De plus, le défendeur soutient que les conclusions d'invraisemblance de l'agent n'étaient pas fondées sur ce point uniquement. L'agent a aussi conclu que le demandeur avait fourni des réponses vagues et confuses.
Aucun manquement à l'équité
[29]
L'agent n'avait pas l'obligation de se renseigner auprès de l'ONARS et de la Cour au sujet de la validité des documents. L'agent a conclu que les documents avaient été modifiés et le demandeur n'a fourni aucune réponse satisfaisante pour justifier cela. Le défendeur a écrit au paragraphe 38 de ses observations: [traduction] « les modifications manuscrites aux dates étaient une preuve claire que les documents n'étaient pas des documents valides émis par un gouvernement étranger ». Le défendeur soutient que, contrairement aux allégations du demandeur, l'agent lui a donné plusieurs occasions d'expliquer les modifications au document.
Aucun risque de persécution
[30]
La question de l'agent au sujet du point de vue des autorités visait à obtenir plus de renseignements sur la situation du demandeur et non à se mettre dans l'état d'esprit du persécuteur, comme le demandeur le soutient. L'agent a tenu compte de toute la preuve dont il était saisi et a raisonnablement conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas de crainte fondée de persécution.
Les observations écrites supplémentaires du demandeur
[31]
Le demandeur répond que si l'agent n'avait pas fondé sa décision sur l'erreur, il aurait dû présenter un affidavit à ce sujet. Plutôt, une lecture attentive des motifs montre que les erreurs ont servi de fondement à la décision. Comme les conclusions erronées ont servi de fondement à la décision de l'agent, elles ont porté préjudice au demandeur.
[32]
Le demandeur répond que l'agent n'a tiré aucune conclusion sur la vraisemblance de la preuve documentaire dont il était saisi. En fait, le défendeur demande à la Cour de tirer des conclusions sur la vraisemblance, ce qui n'est pas le rôle de la Cour.
[33]
En ce qui a trait au fait que le demandeur et son épouse ont habité ensemble avant leur mariage, l'agent a commis une erreur en ne faisant pas la distinction entre les normes culturelles et le comportement individuel. Une preuve d'un écart par rapport à la norme culturelle ne peut jamais être un fondement approprié pour douter de la crédibilité.
[34]
Le demandeur répond qu'il a une crainte fondée de persécution.
Les observations écrites supplémentaires du défendeur
[35]
Pour l'essentiel, le défendeur a présenté les mêmes observations que dans ses observations originales, mais il a mis plus importance sur le fondement factuel de ses arguments, en plus de mentionner son désaccord quant aux arguments du demandeur.
Analyse et décision
La question no 1
Quelle est la norme de contrôle appropriée?
[36]
Lorsque la jurisprudence établit quelle norme de contrôle s'applique à une question particulière dont la cour est saisie, la cour de révision peut adopter cette norme-là (voir l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 57).
[37]
Les décisions portant sur des demandes de visas de résidence permanente dans la catégorie de personnes protégées à titre humanitaire outre-frontières et dans la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de la Convention outre-frontières doivent être contrôlées en fonction de la norme de la décision raisonnable (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Les conclusions de fait et les conclusions de crédibilité d'un agent des visas sont assujetties à la même norme de contrôle (voir  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[38]
L'allégation de manquement à l'équité est une question d'équité procédurale qui doit être contrôlée selon la norme de la décision correcte (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[39]
Lorsqu'elle effectue le contrôle de la décision de l'agent selon la norme de la décision raisonnable, la Cour ne devrait pas intervenir à moins que l'agent n'ait tiré une conclusion qui n'est pas transparente, justifiable et intelligible et qui n'appartient pas aux issues possibles acceptables sur la base de la preuve dont il dispose (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47;
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Comme la Cour suprême l'a décidé au paragraphe 59 de l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, il n'appartient pas à la cour qui effectue le contrôle de substituer son appréciation d'une issue préférable, ce n'est pas non plus le rôle de la cour qui effectue le contrôle de soupeser de nouveau la preuve.
[40]
Lors de l'examen de la décision de l'agent selon la norme de la décision correcte, la Cour ne fera preuve d'aucune retenue. En fait, la Cour substituera sa propre conclusion et rendra la décision qui s'impose (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 50).
La question no 2
L'agent des visas a-t-il commis une erreur en ce qui a trait à la participation du demandeur au groupe jeunesse à l'université?
[41]
Le défendeur a reconnu que l'agent avait commis une erreur au sujet de la participation du demandeur à un groupe jeunesse alors qu'il était à l'université. Je conviens avec le défendeur que l'erreur n'a pas porté à conséquence dans la décision.
La question no 3
L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur dans sa décision au sujet de la fausseté des documents?
[42]
L'agent a conclu que certains des documents du demandeur n'étaient pas authentiques parce qu'il s'agissait de photocopies et que des dates avaient été changées. Le demandeur a déclaré que les documents lui avaient été donnés, ou avaient été donnés à son représentant, par les autorités. L'agent n'a pas tenté de vérifier l'authenticité des documents et il n'a pas donné au demandeur l'occasion de faire vérifier les documents en question. Compte tenu des faits en l'espèce, je suis d'avis qu'il y a eu manquement à l'équité procédurale.
La question no 4
La conclusion quant au manque de crédibilité que l'agent a tirée était-elle fondée sur le témoignage du demandeur selon lequel son épouse et lui avaient habité ensemble avant de se marier, ce qui était inapproprié dans leur culture?
[43]
Dans l'ensemble, l'agent a conclu qu'il était invraisemblable que le demandeur et son épouse aient habité ensemble avant de se marier parce que les coutumes de leur pays considèrent que cela est inapproprié. Cette conclusion d'invraisemblance a servi de fondement pour conclure que le demandeur n'était pas crédible. Je ne suis pas convaincu qu'une telle conclusion d'invraisemblance aurait dû être tirée, compte tenu de la preuve en l'espèce. Le demandeur et son épouse auraient pu décider d'habiter ensemble avant de se marier (comme ils l'ont déclaré) malgré la coutume de leur pays.
La question no 5
L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur en demandant au demandeur pourquoi le gouvernement le poursuivait?
[44]
Je conviens avec le demandeur que ce dernier ne saurait pas nécessairement pourquoi le gouvernement le poursuivait. Il a répondu à la question de savoir pourquoi il croyait que le gouvernement lui en voulait. À mon avis, c'est tout ce qu'on pouvait demander au demandeur, compte tenu de la preuve en l'espèce. Si le fait que le demandeur ne savait pas pourquoi il était poursuivi a servi à rendre une conclusion négative quant à la crédibilité, cette conclusion est déraisonnable.
[45]
Pour tous les motifs qui précèdent, je suis d'avis que la décision de l'agent était déraisonnable et qu'il y a aussi eu un manquement à l'équité procédurale.
[46]
En conséquence, la demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie et l'affaire est renvoyée à un agent différent pour nouvelle décision.
[47]
Aucune des parties n'a souhaité proposer de question grave de portée générale pour que je la considère en vue de la certification.
JUGEMENT
[48]
LA COUR STATUE que la
demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie et que l'affaire est renvoyée à un autre agent pour nouvelle décision.
ANNEXE
Les dispositions légales pertinentes
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés, LC 2001, c 27
11. (1) L'étranger doit, préalablement à son entrée au Canada, demander à l'agent les visa et autres documents requis par règlement. L'agent peut les délivrer sur preuve, à la suite d'un contrôle, que l'étranger n'est pas interdit de territoire et se conforme à la présente loi.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
11. (1) A foreign national must, before entering Canada, apply to an officer for a visa or for any other document required by the regulations. The visa or document may be issued if, following an examination, the officer is satisfied that the foreign national is not inadmissible and meets the requirements of this Act.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(
a
) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés, DORS/2002-227
139. (1) Un visa de résident permanent est délivré à l'étranger qui a besoin de protection et aux membres de sa famille qui l'accompagnent si, à l'issue d'un contrôle, les éléments suivants sont établis:
[. . .]
e) il fait partie d'une catégorie établie dans la présente section
145. Est un réfugié au sens de la Convention outre-frontières et appartient à la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de cette convention l'étranger à qui un agent a reconnu la qualité de réfugié alors qu'il se trouvait hors du Canada
139. (1) A permanent resident visa shall be issued to a foreign national in need of refugee protection, and their accompanying family members, if following an examination it is established that
[. . .]
(
e
) the foreign national is a member of one of the classes prescribed by this Division
145. A foreign national is a Convention refugee abroad and a member of the Convention refugees abroad class if the foreign national has been determined, outside Canada, by an officer to be a Convention refugee.
[End of document]