 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 William Carson and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Wetston, J. 
 
 April 28, 1995. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Carson, an alien, applied for judicial review of a decision made pursuant to s. 114(1) of the Immigration Act not to exempt him from the requirements of s. 9(1) of the Act. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 4061.1 
 
 Practice - Judicial review - Standing - Carson, an alien, applied for judicial review of a decision made pursuant to s. 114(1) of the Immigration Act not to exempt him from the requirements of s. 9(1) of the Act - His wife, a Canadian citizen, who was his sponsor for landing, claimed she had status at the judicial review - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that "while Mrs. Carson has an interest in this proceeding, in that she is Mr. Carson's sponsor for landing in Canada and she was interviewed as part of the marriage interview involving the H & C [humanitarian and compassionate] determination, these facts are insufficient to give her standing in this judicial review" - See paragraph 4. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 7]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, sect. 9(1), sect. 82.1(1), sect. 114(2) [para. 1]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Barbara Jackman, for the applicants; 
 
 Bonnie Boucher and Stephen Gold, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Jackman & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants; 
 
 George Thomson, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard in Toronto, Ontario, on April 20, 1995, before Wetston, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on April 28, 1995. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Wetston, J. 
 : This is an application pursuant to s. 82.1(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
  to review and set aside a decision, made on February 12, 1994, pursuant to s. 114(2) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 , not to exempt the applicant, William Carson, from the requirements of s. 9(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 .  
 
 
 
 [2] 
  As a preliminary matter, the respondent requested that the court strike Tonya Carson as an applicant in these proceedings. The respondent argued that the subject of this judicial review is the decision made in respect of the applicant William Carson. Tonya Carson is the spouse of Mr. Carson, and it is argued that she has no standing as a party in respect of the remedy sought by Mr. Carson. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The applicant argues that Tonya Carson has standing in this matter because she is his sponsor for landing in Canada. The applicant argues that this is sufficient to ground her claim for standing with respect to this H&C proceeding.  
 
 
 
 [4] 
  While Mrs. Carson has an interest in this proceeding, in that she is Mr. Carson's sponsor for landing in Canada and she was interviewed as part of the marriage interview involving the H&C determination, these facts are insufficient to give her standing in this judicial review. Mrs. Carson is a Canadian citizen and does not require any exemption whatsoever from the  
 Immigration Act 
  or  
 Regulations 
 . Moreover, whether she has standing or not has no impact whatsoever on the ultimate issue in this matter. Accordingly, with respect to this proceeding, the applicant, Tonya Carson, is struck as a party.  
 
 
 
 [5] 
  A number of issues were raised regarding this judicial review. The applicant argues that the immigration officer breached his duty of fairness, ignored evidence before him, and erred in law in making an unreasonable decision on the basis of the evidence before him. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Mr. Dickenson, the immigration officer who reviewed the applicant's file and conducted the interview regarding the bona fides of the applicant's marriage, filed an affidavit in this proceeding and was cross-examined, at length, on March 17, 1995 and March 20, 1995.  
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Pursuant to s. 114(2) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 , the Minister is authorized to exempt persons from s. 114(1) regulations or to otherwise facilitate their admission into Canada where the Minister is satisfied that such exemption should occur owing to the existence of humanitarian and compassionate considerations. It is clear that the existence of a humanitarian and compassionate review offers an individual special and additional consideration for an exemption from Canadian immigration laws which are otherwise applied:  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  No consideration of a humanitarian and compassionate determination can be made without regard to the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in  
 Shah 
 , supra. In that case, the Court of Appeal clearly indicated that the duty of fairness varies according to the circumstances of the case. In this type of case, the court was of the opinion that the content of that duty was minimal. The court emphasized that the applicant does not have a case to meet of which he must be given notice, rather the applicant must persuade the decision-maker that he should be provided the exceptional treatment and be exempted from the general requirements of the law. No hearing need be held and no reasons need be provided. The Court of Appeal clearly indicated that to succeed in an attack on a humanitarian and compassionate decision the decision-maker must have erred in law, proceeded on some wrong or improper principle, or acted in bad faith. The Court of Appeal also pointed out that such a burden is, indeed, a heavy one.  
 
 
 
 [9] 
  A fundamental issue in this matter involves the  
 bona fides of the marriage between the Carsons. The applicant alleges that Mr. Dickenson erred in law and fact with respect to his findings regarding the marriage as well as matters associated with Mr. Carson's imminent departure. In the case before the court, the immigration officer conducted an extensive interview regarding the genuineness of the marriage of Mr. Carson and Mrs. Carson. A report was prepared, about which Mr. Dickenson was cross-examined, at length. A review of the record, including the transcripts, reveals that Mr. Dickenson considered all aspects of the marriage, including numerous letters and cards associated with the actual marriage. However, he was not satisfied that the marriage was bona fides. While counsel for the applicant questions how an applicant should go about proving the bona fides of a marriage, essentially that is a question of fact. The applicant must satisfy the officer that he should be accorded special treatment and be exempted from the  
 Act 
  and  
 Regulations 
 . On the evidence, the court is satisfied that no error of law was committed by Mr. Dickenson with respect to his consideration of the bona fides of the marriage or matters associated with his understanding that Mr. Carson would face imminent departure pursuant to the  
 Immigration Act 
  and  
 Regulations 
 . 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  However, the applicant also argued that Mr. Dickenson ignored evidence regarding the possibility of risk should he be required to return to Northern Ireland. At a previous hearing, Mr. Carson was denied refugee status and leave to appeal from that decision was denied. Mr. Dickenson did indicate in his oral testimony that he had a responsibility to assess risk as part of the H&C determination. More specifically, it is contended that Mr. Dickenson ignored a letter from the Royal Ulster Constabulary that Mr. Carson was on a hit list. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  In his report Mr. Dickenson states that there was no evidence adduced to support a statement regarding Mr. Carson's survival in Ireland being in question. However, in his affidavit, Mr. Dickenson notes there was insufficient evidence, rather than no evidence, that the applicant would face severe problems in Northern Ireland. This apparent contradiction was the subject of cross-examination. Mr. Dickenson states in his affidavit that he considered counsel's submissions. On cross-examination Mr. Dickenson testified that the RUC letter plus certain posters regarding Mr. Carson were attached to those submissions. I am satisfied that Mr. Dickenson reviewed and considered the applicant's submissions regarding risk. I am of the opinion that no error of law was committed by the immigration officer. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Accordingly, the application for judicial review is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Counsel for the applicant proposed that the matter of certification be addressed in writing. The court has decided not to issue its order until counsel have had an opportunity to review this decision and provide argument, in writing, as to whether there is a serious question for certification. Counsel for the applicant shall file her submissions regarding certification within one week of receiving this decision. Counsel for the respondent shall file her submissions within one week after receiving the submissions of counsel for the applicant. An order of the court will not be issued until the matter of certification is considered. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



