 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woldemariam v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2012), 411 F.T.R. 295 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. JL.029 
 
 
 
 Firehiwot Woldemariam (applicant) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent) 
 
 (T-1046-11; 2012 FC 621; 2012 CF 621) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Woldemariam v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Near, J. 
 
 May 23, 2012. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Woldemariam's application for citizenship was rejected on the basis that she had not met the requirement of s. 5(1)(e) of the Citizenship Act to have adequate knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship. The judge declined to exercise discretion in favour of making a recommendation for citizenship under either s. 5(3) (compassionate grounds) or 5(4) (special cases). Woldemariam appealed. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the appeal. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2526 
 
 Naturalization - Qualifications - Knowledge of Canada - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 2530 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2526.1 
 
 Naturalization - Qualifications - Knowledge of citizenship responsibilities and privileges - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 2530 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2529 
 
 Naturalization - Qualifications - Waiver of - Compassionate grounds - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 2530 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2530 
 
 Naturalization - Qualifications - Waiver of - Special cases - Woldemariam was a single mother of three children - She had resided in Canada as a permanent resident since July 2006 - She applied for citizenship - On the knowledge test, Woldemariam scored 7 out of 20 - In June 2011, a citizenship judge found that Woldemariam had not met the requirement of s. 5(1)(e) of the Citizenship Act to have adequate knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship - The judge declined to exercise discretion in favour of making a recommendation for citizenship under either s. 5(3) (compassionate grounds) or 5(4) (special cases) - Woldemariam's application was not approved - On appeal, she submitted evidence that was not before the citizenship judge, including a medical letter substantiating that the care of her three children, one of whom was autistic, made it difficult for her to prepare for and focus on the test - The Federal Court dismissed the appeal - The onus was on Woldemariam to satisfy the judge that she fulfilled the Act's requirements or merited an exercise of discretion - She had failed to do so - That shortcoming could not be resolved simply by bringing new information to the court - In the absence of evidence of special circumstances, the judge's decision was reasonable. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Daniel H. Dagago, for the applicant; 
 
 Christopher Ezrin, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Daniel H. Dagago, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This appeal was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on April 17, 2012, by Near, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment at Ottawa, Ontario, on May 23, 2012. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Near, J. 
 : The Applicant, Firehiwot Woldemariam, brings an appeal of the decision of a Citizenship Judge made under subsection 5(1)(e) of the  
 Citizenship Act 
 , RSC 1985, c C-29 (the  
 Act 
 ). 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  For the reasons set out below, her appeal is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 I.  
 Background 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Since July 25, 2006, the Applicant has remained in Canada as a permanent resident. She is a single mother of three children. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  She appeared before a Citizenship Judge for a hearing on June 2, 2011. At that time, she scored only 7 out of 20 on the knowledge test. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  In a letter dated June 3, 2011, the Citizenship Judge found that she had not met the requirement of subsection 5(1)(e) to have adequate knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship. She had "poor knowledge of Canada's social history, political structure and legal system." 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The Citizenship Judge also considered whether to make a recommendation for the exercise of discretion. The Citizenship Judge nonetheless concluded that "[t]here was no evidence presented to me at the hearing of special circumstances that would justify me in making such a recommendation under either of subsections 5(3) or 5(4)." As a consequence, her application was not approved. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Issue 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Applicant raises the following issue: 
 
 
 
 (a) Did the Citizenship Judge err in failing to recommend the exercise of discretion under subsections 5(3) or 5(4)? 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Standard of Review 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Following  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, discretionary decisions of a Citizenship Judge under subsections 5(3) or 5(4) are reviewed according to the reasonableness standard (see for example  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  It may be open to the Court to refer the matter back to a citizenship judge if it is not satisfied that relevant factors have been taken into account in the exercise of that discretion (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The Court should have regard to the "existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility" as well as whether the decision falls "within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  A Citizenship Judge can recommend that the Minister exercise discretion and waive the knowledge requirement on compassionate grounds (subsection 5(3)) or in "cases of special or unusual hardship" (subsection 5(4)). 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The Applicant argues that the Citizenship Judge erred by not recognizing the special circumstances in her case that would warrant the exercise of discretion. She is burdened with the care of her three children, the oldest being diagnosed with autism. This made it difficult for her to focus on and prepare for the test. She provides a medical letter to the Court to substantiate these claims, but acknowledges that this information was not before the Citizenship Judge. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Whatever the circumstances facing the Applicant on taking the knowledge test, the critical issue is that they were not brought to the Citizenship Judge's attention for consideration at the time of the hearing. The Citizenship Judge found there was no evidence presented to recommend waiving the knowledge requirement and exercising discretion in the Applicant's favour. That approach was reasonable under the circumstances. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, when faced with new evidence of an applicant's illnesses, Justice Sean Harrington concluded that "the Citizenship Judge can hardly be criticized for not considering whether to make a recommendation to the Minister to grant Mrs. Huynh's citizenship on compassionate grounds on material which was  
 not 
  before him" [emphasis in original]. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Similarly, Justice Frederick Gibson held in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED that a citizenship judge did not commit an "error in determining that there was "no evidence" presented before him or her to establish "special circumstances" that would have justified a recommendation of exercise of discretion" where no medical evidence was previously adduced. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Justice Gibson also confirmed that "the onus is on an applicant for Canadian citizenship to satisfy a Citizenship Judge that he or she fulfills the requirements of the Act or warrants an exercise of discretion by the Citizenship Judge." The Applicant failed to satisfy this onus by presenting the evidence to the Citizenship Judge in this case. This shortcoming cannot be resolved simply by bringing new information to the Court. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The authorities relied on by the Applicant are of limited assistance as they address situations where a citizenship judge ignored or may have provided inadequate reasons for rejecting medical evidence and related statements by an applicant at the time of the initial determination (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Lacking any evidence of special circumstances, it was reasonable for the Citizenship Judge not to recommend the exercise of discretion based on subsections 5(3) or 5(4) of the  
 Act 
  in this instance. The Applicant's appeal is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [19] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
  this appeal is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Sharon McCartney/vnh 
 
 
 

