 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1853-9049  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  November 18, 1986. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Minister of National Revenue ordered 1853-9049 Quebec Inc. to pay forthwith pursuant to s. 225.2(1) of the Income Tax Act $3,096,556.68 in reassessments for 1983 and 1984. Immediate payment was demanded on the ground that giving the taxpayer time to pay the amount assessed would jeopardize recovery of the amount. The taxpayer applied for review of the Minister's order. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the application and set aside the Minister's order. 
 
 
 
 Income Tax - Topic 9236 
 
 Enforcement - Collection - Direction to pay assessed tax forthwith - Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, s. 225.2 - Section 225.2 empowered the Minister to direct a taxpayer to pay the assessed tax forthwith, where collection would be jeopardized by delay - 1853-9049 Quebec Inc. applied for review of the Minister's decision which ordered it to pay $3,096,556.68 forthwith - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the application - The court held that given the evidence, there was nothing to show that the taxpayer was trying to avoid its tax obligations. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, sect. 225.1 [paras. 4, 9]; sect. 225.2 [para. 4]; sect. 225.1(1) [paras. 13, 23]; sect. 225.2(1) [paras. 5, 13, 22]; sect. 225.2(3) [para. 7]; sect. 225.2(5) [para. 7]; sect. 225.2(8) [para. 24]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Andre Levesque, for the applicant; 
 
 Richard Corbeil, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Chait Salomon, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant; 
 
 Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on October 28, 1986, at Montreal, Quebec, before Rouleau, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on November 18, 1986: 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Rouleau, J. 
  [TRANSLATION]: This is an application to review an order by the Minister of National Revenue which directed the applicant to pay forthwith the total amount of the reassessments made for 1983 and 1984. The total amount of tax, penalties and interest required for these years is $3,096,556.68. 
 
 
 
 FACTS 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  On March 11, 1986, the Minister of National Revenue issued the applicant notices of reassessment for its taxation years 1983 and 1984. Even before the ink was dry on these notices of reassessment, on the same day, the Minister ordered the applicant to pay the total amount of these reassessments, $3,096,556.68, forthwith. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Further, on March 12, 1986, the Minister seized the applicant's bank account at the Banque Nationale de Paris, seized a balance of sale of some $6.2 million in the Casse de dépôt et de placement du Québec owed to the applicant and seized a further balance of sale of some $700,000 owed to the applicant by Alfid Services Immobiliers. 
 
 
 
 LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  For clarification, I reproduce s. 225.2 of the Act in extenso: 
 
 
 
 "225.2(1) Notwithstanding section 225.1, where it may reasonably be considered that collection of an amount assessed in respect of a taxpayer would be jeopardized by a delay in the collection thereof, and the Minister has, by notice served personally or by registered letter addressed to the taxpayer at his latest known address, so advised the taxpayer and directed the taxpayer to pay forthwith the amount assessed or any part thereof, the Minister may forthwith take any of the actions described in paragraphs 225.1(1)(a) to (g) with respect to that amount or that part thereof. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where the Minister has under subsection (1) directed a taxpayer to pay an amount forthwith, the taxpayer may 
 
 
 
 (a) upon three days notice of motion to the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, apply to a judge of a superior court having jurisdiction in the province in which the taxpayer resides or to a judge of the Federal Court of Canada for an order fixing a day (not earlier than 14 days nor later than 28 days after the date of the order) and place for the determination of the question whether the direction was justified in the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 (b) serve a copy of the order on the Deputy Attorney General of Canada within six days after the day on which it was made; and 
 
 
 
 (c) if he has proceeded as authorized by paragraph (b), apply at the appointed time and place for an order determining the question. 
 
 
 
 "(3) An application to a judge under paragraph (2)(a) shall be made 
 
 
 
 (a) within 30 days after the day on which the notice under subsection (1) was served or mailed; or 
 
 
 
 (b) within such further time as the judge, upon being satisfied that the application was made as soon as circumstances permitted, may allow. 
 
 
 
 "(4) An application under paragraph (2)(c) may, on the application of the taxpayer, be heard in camera, if the taxpayer establishes to the satisfaction of the judge that the circumstances of the case justify in camera proceedings. 
 
 
 
 "(5) On the hearing of an application under paragraph (2)(c) the burden of justifying the direction is on the Minister. 
 
 
 
 "(6) On an application under paragraph (2)(c), the judge shall determine the question summarily and may confirm, vacate or vary the direction and make such other order as he considers appropriate. 
 
 
 
 "(7) Where the judge to whom an application has been made under paragraph (2)(a) cannot for any reason act or continue to act in the application under paragraph (2)(c), the application under paragraph (2)(c) may be made to another judge. 
 
 
 
 "(8) Costs shall not be awarded upon the disposition of an application under subsection (2)." 
 
 
 
 As the introductory subsection of s. 225.2 indicates, the recovery procedure created is an exception to the general rule, laid down by s. 225.1 limiting the Minister's right to recover unpaid taxes. Section 225.1 provides: 
 
 
 
 "225.1(1) Where a taxpayer is liable for the payment of an amount assessed under this Act (in this subsection referred to as the 'unpaid amount'), other than an amount payable under subsection 227(9), the Minister shall not, for the purpose of collecting the unpaid amount, 
 
 
 
 (a) commence legal proceedings in a court, 
 
 
 
 (b) certify the unpaid amount under subsection 223(1), 
 
 
 
 (c) require a person to make a payment under subsection 224(1), 
 
 
 
 (d) require an institution or person to make a payment under subsection 224(1.1), 
 
 
 
 (e) require the retention of the unpaid amount by way of deduction or set-off under section 224.1, 
 
 
 
 (f) require a person to turn over moneys under subsection 224.3(1), or 
 
 
 
 (g) give a notice, issue a certificate or make a direction under subsection 225(1) 
 
 
 
 before the day that is 90 days after the day of mailing of the notice of assessment." 
 
 
 
 BACKGROUND 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The introduction of this legislation was in accordance with the government's desire to protect the rights of taxpayers, as indicated by the following extract from the Speech from the Throne opening the First Session of the Thirty-Third Parliament - November 5, 1984: 
 
 
 
 "The rights of taxpayers must be protected. In particular, legislation will be presented to ensure that no taxpayer has to pay taxes in dispute before an impartial hearing has been concluded." 
 
 
 
 In concrete terms this intention took the form of a bill which ultimately, on adoption, became c. 45 of the Statutes of Canada 1985. As regards the purposes of the bill, I take the following extracts from a speech to the House of Commons by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Finance. The extracts are taken from the House of Commons Debates for September 24, 1985, at pp. 6935 and 6936: 
 
 
 
 "The proposed amendments relate mainly to three points: first, collection restrictions; second, the repayment of contested taxes; third, preventive measures against abuses of the new system. 
 
 
 
 "Although an assessment established by Revenue Canada under the  
 Act 
  is payable by the taxpayer without delay, the amendments pertaining to collection restrictions provide that no formal collection measure may be taken by Revenue Canada within 90 days of the assessment. During these 90 days the taxpayer may, as is the case now, appeal the decision of the Minister by producing a notice of objection to the assessment. 
 
 
 
 "If a taxpayer does not produce a notice of objection and does not pay the assessed amount, according to the amendments, formal steps to collect this amount may be taken 90 days after the date of assessment. However, if the taxpayer does produce a notice of objection, formal steps to collect the amount in controversy shall be delayed until Revenue Canada has concluded its review of the objection and until the period the taxpayer has to appeal from Revenue Canada's decision on the objection has expired. If a taxpayer decides to appeal before a court, within the 90-day period provided under the  
 Act 
 , to challenge the assessment as confirmed or modified by Revenue Canada, the  
 Bill 
  provides that formal steps to collect the amount in controversy shall again be delayed until the court hands down its final decision. 
 
 
 
 "Should the court's decision be favourable (Hansard, 24.9.85 - TR.) to the taxpayer, the latter must either pay the amount in controversy or provide security for that amount to Revenue Canada, even if he appeals from the decision to a superior court. 
 
 
 
 "As in the present  
 Act 
 , interest on the amounts finally determined payable by the taxpayer is calculated from the date on which those amounts were initially determined to be payable. 
 
 
 
 "In addition to provisions limiting the right of Revenue Canada to commence collection procedures before the taxpayer has had an opportunity to apply to a court, there are certain amendments allowing the taxpayer to ask that the amount in controversy that he has already paid be refunded to him or that the collateral provided for that amount be returned to him until he appeals before a court from the assessment or the new assessment established by the Minister of National Revenue. 
 
 
 
 "Moreover, if Revenue Canada has not replied to an objection filed by a taxpayer within 120 days from the date he served his notice of objection, the taxpayer may ask that the amount in controversy be reimbursed to him or that the security offered by him be refunded, without having to appeal to another court. 
 
 
 
 " 
 In addition, the proposed Bill includes safety features against possible abuses of the new system. Where there are reasons to believe that the granting of a delay could jeopardize the collection of the amounts in controversy, the Bill allows Revenue Canada to take forthwith recovery action. On the other hand, the taxpayer has a right to ask a judge to review the opinion of Revenue Canada that the collection of the amount in controversy would be jeopardized by such a delay 
 . 
 
 
 
 "There is in the  
 Bill 
  another safety clause which authorizes the courts to collect an amount not exceeding 10 per cent of the amount in controversy in the case of an appeal which they deem unfounded and made essentially for the purpose of unduly postponing payment of the amount of an already owed contribution. 
 
 
 
 "Mr. Speaker, the inclusion in the  
 Income Tax Act 
  of provisions dealing with the payment of amounts in controversy is a concrete effort to ensure the equitable application of our tax collection system, based more on a spirit of natural justice than judiciary procedure. Thanks to these provisions, taxpayers will not have to pay taxes which they feel they do not owe as long as their cases have not been heard by an independent court. In other words, the taxpayer will not be deemed guilty until fairly dealt with by the courts. This is a major step in the implementation of a fair and equitable tax collection system for all Canadians." (My emphasis) 
 
 
 
 In short, as my brother Joyal, J., observed in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  T-667-86 (at p. 2): 
 
 
 
 "These rules represent a considerable departure from a long-standing provision in the Income Tax Act and are meant to dampen considerably the right of the Minister to collect a tax until various avenues of appeal have been exhausted." 
 
 
 
 [See: (1986), 5 F.T.R. 161]. 
 
 
 
 However, the Minister still has a way out, namely s. 225.2(1), cited above, which allows him to taken immediate steps for recovery when it may reasonably be considered that giving the taxpayer time to pay the amount assessed in respect of him would jeopardize recovery of the amount. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In such circumstances, as Joyal, J., again wrote in Peter S.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Minister may by order require payment of the tax assessed forthwith and commence recovery proceedings which he would not otherwise be able to initiate. This is what happened in the case at bar. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  As I emphasized in one of the extracts from the House of Commons Debates, the taxpayer can object to such an exceptional measure. I trust that it will not be held against me, but I can do no better than again cite my learned brother Joyal, J., to explain the machinery of review created by s. 225.2(3) of the Act (at p. 3): 
 
 
 
 "Pursuant to para. 225.2(3), he [the taxpayer] may file an application to a Superior Court or Federal Court judge to have the direction varied or vacated. It is a kind of show cause hearing where the Minister has the burden of justifying his direction. The judge may then dispose of the application by confirming the direction, by vacating it or varying it and may make such other order as he considers appropriate. In effect, a judge may look at the grounds on which the Minister has made his direction and decide whether or not they are of a nature to justify the exceptional measure the Minister has taken. In effect, the procedure is a check on the Minister's authority which would otherwise be substantially unfettered." 
 
 
 
 Those are the circumstances of the case at bar, and as provided in s. 225.2(5) of the Act, it is for the Minister to justify his order. 
 
 
 
 MINISTER'S ARGUMENTS 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  In support of her position the respondent filed a number of sworn statements, including one by Marc Blanchard, taxation director in the St-Hubert district office of the Department of National Revenue, Taxation. It is he who signed the original of the notice on March 11, 1986, containing the order to the applicant to pay the amount of the reassessments forthwith. The reasons prompting him to act in this manner are indicated in paragraph 13 of his sworn statement, which I reproduce forthwith: 
 
 
 
 "13. I therefore considered on March 11, 1986, that it might reasonably be considered that giving 1853 time to pay the assessment made in respect of it for 1983 and 1984, in the amount of $3,096,556.98, would jeopardize the recovery, and I decided to order payment forthwith for the following reasons: 
 
 
 
 (a) it appeared that 1853 paid no attention to the notice and warning from their accountants in October 1983, regarding its tax situation for 1983; 
 
 
 
 (b) the accountant in fact said that the money might quickly be gone and we knew what we had to do; 
 
 
 
 (c) on February 14, 1986, the directors settled their differences; 
 
 
 
 (d) on the same day (February 14, 1986), despite a notice from the accountants regarding possible tax of $1,900,000 for 1983 and 1984, 1853 
 
 
 
 - sold debts totalling $1,608,000 in capital alone, bearing interest at 12% and over, and due partly in January 1987, partly in February 1988 and partly in February 1993; 
 
 
 
 - obtained the sum of approximately $1,664,000 for this transfer; 
 
 
 
 - declared and paid a dividend of some $4,500,000 to the personal management companies of Messrs. Gagnon and Archambault; 
 
 
 
 (e) all that remained in certificates of deposit was some $1,300,000, due on March 24, 1986, to cover the federal and provincial tax for 1985 and 1986; 
 
 
 
 (f) the amount of the debt by the Caisse de dépôt et de placement du Québec to 1853 was between $1 and 6 million; 
 
 
 
 (g) the assets mentioned in paragraph 4(b) above (other than the debt by the Caisse de dépôt et de placement) not already liquidated did not cover the amount of the assessment, $3,096,556.68, and could easily be liquidated or discounted." 
 
 
 
 The assets referred to in paragraph (g) above are, in addition to the debt by the Caisse de dépôt et de placement, a promissory note for $1,000,000 from the Crédit industriel Desjardins, bearing interest at 12.5% and due on January 14, 1987, Commission scolaire Le Gardeur bonds in the amount of $608,000, bearing interest at 12% and 12.5% and due partly in February 1988 and partly in February 1993, except that this note and these bonds were transferred to Lévesque Beaubien Inc. on February 14, 1986, for approximately $1,664,000. Finally, the applicant was still owed a second mortgage debt amounting to $813,000. Those grosso modo are the facts and reasons why the taxation director thought the disputed order should be made. 
 
 
 
 APPLICANT'S ARGUMENTS 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  In its application for review, the applicant alleged that the Minister lacked sufficient grounds for considering that granting the applicant the time specified in the Act (s. 225.1) to pay the amount of the assessments would jeopardize recovery of the tax. The applicant's argument was based on a number of sworn statements both by directors of the applicant company and by lawyers and accounting experts hired by it. The following is a summary of what may be gleaned from these statements: 
 
 
 
 (1) the Minister did not take into account the fact that the applicant paid a dividend of $4.5 million only after having previously set aside $1.3 million for its 1986 taxes; 
 
 
 
 (2) the Minister did not take into account a balance of sale of some $7 million owed to the applicant by the Caisse de dépôt et de placement, and that this balance returned the applicant $60,000 a month in the form of interest; 
 
 
 
 (3) the Minister did not take into account a tax credit of some $1 million payable to the applicant in 1987; 
 
 
 
 (4) the Minister did not take into account another balance of sale of $700,000 owed to the applicant by Alfid Services Immobiliers; and 
 
 
 
 (5) the Minister did not take into account the value of the shares held by the applicant in its subsidiaries Place Mont-Royal Inc. and Bupo Inc. 
 
 
 
 APPLICABLE LAW 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Since these new provisions received royal assent, on October 29, 1985, this is the third application of this kind submitted to the Federal Court. The first was Peter S.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and the second, just recently, was  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  McNair, J., on September 5, 1986. [See (1986), 7 F.T.R. 42]. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  In the latter case, my learned brother made the following observations (at p. 3): 
 
 
 
 "In my judgment, the issue goes to the matter of collection jeopardy by reason of the delay normally attributable to the appeal process. The wording of s. [225.2(1)] would seem to indicate that  
 it is necessary to show that because of the passage of time involved in an appeal the taxpayer would become less able to pay the amount assessed 
 . 
 
 
 
 "In my opinion, the fact that the taxpayer was unable to pay the amount assessed at the time of the direction would not, by itself, be conclusive or determinative. Moreover, the mere suspicion or concern that delay may jeopardize collection would not be sufficient per se.  
 The test of 'whether it may reasonably be considered' is susceptible of being reasonably translated into the test of whether the evidence on balance of probability is sufficient to lead to the conclusion that it is more likely than not that collection would be jeopardized by delay 
 ." (My emphasis) 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  I agree with McNair, J., when he says that the Minister can require payment of the assessment forthwith if a taxpayer may not be in a position to pay  
 simply because of the passage of time 
  allowed by the Act. The amount of money involved is not significant: what the Minister has to know is whether the taxpayer's assets can be liquidated in the meantime or be seized by other creditors and so not available to him. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Similarly, I agree entirely with Joyal, J., when he says in Peter S.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that the word "may" and the phrase "reasonably be considered" read together give the Minister great latitude. In my opinion, this latitude allows the Minister to rely on the exceptional provisions contained in s. 225.2(1) whenever, on a balance of probability, the time allowed the taxpayer by s. 225.1(1) would jeopardize his debt. I emphasize on a balance of probability, not beyond all reasonable doubt. In this I concur with the remarks of McNair, J., reproduced above. I would say in passing here that I agree with counsel for the respondent when he told the Court that the immediate payment order under s. 225.2(1) is not equivalent to a seizure before judgment as provided in arts. 733 et seq. of the Quebec Code of Civil Procedure. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Dubé, J.A., of the Quebec Court of Appeal made the following observation, at 237: 
 
 
 
 "... the suing creditor must adduce on oath facts establishing that the debtor is trying to remove or conceal his possessions so as to prevent his creditor realizing the debt; refusing to pay or delaying payment is a ground which justifies the creditor in bringing a court action against his debtor, but is not automatically reason to fear that unless there is a seizure before judgment the debt will be jeopardized. Seizure before judgment is undoubtedly an extraordinary form of relief which can only be granted for extraordinary reasons: in practice in order to be entitled to it a party must allege fraud or grounds amounting to fraud against the defaulting debtor." 
 
 
 
 Clearly the burden placed on the Minister in the case at bar is well within that placed on a seizing creditor under art. 733 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The Minister may certainly act not only in cases of fraud or situations amounting to fraud, but also in cases where the taxpayer may waste, liquidate or otherwise transfer his property to escape the tax authorities: in short, to meet any situation in which a taxpayer's assets may vanish into thin air because of the passage of time. Accordingly, I think it is now for me to decide whether in the case at bar the Minister had reasonable grounds for believing that the taxpayer would waste, liquidate or otherwise transfer its assets, so jeopardizing the Minister's debt. 
 
 
 
 RATIO DECIDENDI 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  After hearing the parties and taking their arguments into consideration, I have come to the conclusion that the respondent was not justified in requiring payment of the assessments forthwith. There is nothing to show that the applicant was trying to avoid its tax obligations. In concluding as I have done, I have given the greatest weight to the following points. 
 
 
 
 (1)  
 Regarding balance of sale owed by Caisse de dépôt et de placement du Québec 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  It was established that, though part of the debts of the Caisse to the applicant are currently the subject of court actions, the remainder of the debt is not disputed and for the applicant, under the very wording of the transaction, constitutes an account receivable (and so an asset) valued at approximately $3.5 million. It should further be noted that, at the time of the seizure on March 11, 1986, the Caisse was paying $50,000 a month interest. The respondent subsequently consented to a release of the seizure and the monthly payments of the Caisse to the applicant have resumed, as indicated in a letter of April 3, 1986, from the taxation director, Marc Blanchard, filed as Exhibit A of the sworn statement by Bernard Reis, counsel for the applicant. 
 
 
 
 (2)  
 Regarding payment of a dividend of $4.5 million to shareholders of applicant 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The evidence showed that the applicant had never previously paid any dividends and that it was agreed to pay such a dividend as the result of settlement of a dispute between the two sole shareholder-directors of the applicant. This dividend was originally to be some $5.5 million; but after consulting with the applicant's auditors, the directors thought it better to reduce this amount to $4.5 million and to keep a reserve of $1.3 million cash to pay taxes. Though this dividend payment was made on February 14, 1986, a month before the immediate payment order by the Minister, the latter was not able to show that the payment was in fact made to waste, liquidate or otherwise transfer part of the applicant's assets so as to keep them from the Revenue Department. There is nothing unusual in this, especially when we take into account the value of the applicant's assets, including its accounts receivable, and the fact that fundamentally it had only one creditor, the federal Revenue Department. 
 
 
 
 (3)  
 Regarding accountant's statement that applicant's money might quickly be gone and Department knew what it had to do 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  At a meeting between the applicant's accountants and the Department's investigators, one of the accountants allegedly said the following: 
 
 
 
 "1853 has money in the bank now but it might quickly be gone. So you [the Department] know what you have to do." 
 
 
 
 These remarks were passed on by the investigator Ronald Davis to the taxation director, Marc Blanchard. He made them one of the reasons for issuing the payment order (see paragraph 13(b) of his sworn statement). However, what the evidence showed was that this statement was never really taken seriously by the investigators or by Mr. Blanchard himself. When questioned by counsel for the applicant, Mr. Blanchard admitted that his decision to issue the immediate payment order was not specifically based on this statement by the accountant, it was simply "information" which he had (see p. 12 of his examination on affidavit). Similarly, the investigator Ronald Davis, when examined on his affidavit, took pains to minimize the importance of the accountant's statements. I refer the parties to page 13 of his examination, where he replied that he did not necessarily conclude from the statement that people were going to make off with the money. It was a comment, he added, and he did not conclude that immediate steps would have to be taken to recover the amount of the assessment. 
 
 
 
 (4)  
 Regarding interest of one of applicant's directors in company located in West Indies 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  The evidence established that the taxation director's fears regarding the possible transfer of the applicant's assets to the Turks and Caicos Islands, the location of the company in which one of the applicant's directors had an interest, were without foundation. The director in question had ceased to be a shareholder of the West Indian company since November 1, 1984 (see affidavit by Maurice E. Archambault dated April 25, 1986). 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The four points which I have just listed and discussed will be amply sufficient to justify my decision. For greater certainty, however, I would add that the evidence presented on other points, though in my opinion not as important, still is worth taking into account. I refer to the fact that the applicant holds a maritime lien in the amount of $300,000, owns 100% of the capital stock in Place Mont-Royal Inc., which itself owns two pieces of land valued at approximately $700,000, also owns all the shares in another company, Bupo Inc., which has a mortgage on property valued at $300,000, and finally, it is owed a further balance of sale amounting to about $700,000 by Alfid Services Immobiliers. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  As if that were not enough, there is the undertaking by one of the applicant's directors, Maurice E. Archambault, who in his sworn statement on April 9, 1986, promised to block a withdrawal of funds by shareholders or persons connected with them as long as the tax assessments involved in the Minister of National Revenue's order remained unpaid. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  In any case, if the applicant's actions do not comply with the undertaking given by one of its directors on its behalf, the Minister can always apply the provisions of s. 225.2(1) and again require payment of the assessments forthwith. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  Finally, it was established that the seizures in the case at bar have had the effect of paralyzing the applicant's activities and, indirectly, those of some of its subsidiaries. In short, the question is whether the respondent's debt is likely to be more jeopardized by the applicant's paralysis than by the passage of time allowed the taxpayer under s. 225.1(1). In view of what I have just said, the question provides its own answer. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  The Minister's order is accordingly set aside and, pursuant to the provisions of s. 225.2(8), no costs will be awarded. Needless to say, the seizures by garnishment made in the case at bar are also vacated. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Catherine M. Bowlen/kam 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



