[1]
Reed, J.
: These reasons relate to two matters: a motion by the respondents which was filed and served within the required time period under the rules; other motions which were sought to be heard but which were not so filed and served.
Respondents' Motion
[2]
The respondents bring a motion to have the defendants G.A. Yarranton, Robyn G. Usher and David R. Witty, in their capacity as an environmental assessment panel, appointed under the
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act
, struck out as respondents to the applicant's application for judicial review. In default of such order, the respondents seek a stay of that application for judicial review pending appeal of the decision to the Federal Court of Appeal.
[3]
The application to have the named individuals struck out as respondents is based on three grounds: (1) the respondents are not "interested parties" which were heard before the decision-maker (tribunal) and, therefore, do not fall within rule 1602(3); (2) the respondents cannot be parties to the judicial review application on the basis of the decision rendered in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.); (3) proceeding against the three individuals is prohibited by s. 35(6) of the
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 37.
[4]
With respect to rule 1602(3), as counsel for the applicant notes, the wording of that subsection does not purport to be exhaustive. It provides that "any interested person who is adverse in interest to the applicant in the proceedings ...
shall be named
as a respondent in the notice of motion". The subsection does not, however, state that only such persons may be named. That is, while the subsection requires the naming of those adverse in interest, it does not preclude the naming of others and this can include the panel members themselves, when it is appropriate to do so. An interested party is defined in rule 1600 as "
a person who was heard
in the proceedings before the federal board ... in respect of which the application for judicial review is made". Thus, not even all interested persons adverse in interest are required to be named as parties but only those who "were heard" before the Board. As counsel noted, this does not preclude the naming of others, as respondents, in appropriate circumstances. I accept that argument.
[5]
With respect to the
Bernard
case, supra, that case dealt with an application by the Canadian Human Rights Commission to be added as a respondent with respect to a judicial review application of its own decision. This was refused on the ground that the new
Federal Court Rules
did not permit such but that the Commission was required to seek intervenor status. Counsel for the applicant distinguishes the present case on the ground that it only applies to circumstances in which the relevant tribunal has not been added as a party respondent by the applicant but seeks to make itself a party on its own motion. It is argued that the
Bernard
decision does not apply to the present case because the panel members are not applying to be added as respondents but have been named in that capacity by the applicant. More importantly, perhaps, the decision which is being challenged by way of judicial review is not one which was made by the panel members. The decision under attack is that of the Minister of the Environment appointing, or purporting to appoint, the three individuals. The applicant argues that those appointments are invalid. Consequently, the applicant seeks an injunctive remedy against the three individuals to prevent them from attempting to act as members of the panel. Counsel argues that it is necessary to add the three individuals and to name them as respondents in order to obtain this injunctive remedy. As a practical matter, he also notes that the assessment panel does not carry a formal name, it does not have a permanent structure but is ad hoc in nature, therefore, he argues, it is appropriate to name the three individuals in their capacity as members of the panel. I am persuaded by these arguments.
[6]
With respect to the s. 35(6) argument, I simply do not interpret that subsection in the same way as counsel for the respondents. It provides:
"(6) No action or other proceeding lies or shall be commenced against a member of a review panel for or in respect of anything done or omitted to be done, during the course of and for the purposes of the assessment by the review panel."
In my view, this provision is meant to shield panel members from legal action being taken as a result of decisions they might make in the course of acting as such. The protection granted is analogous to that accorded to judges who are shielded from legal action with respect to their decisions. I do not interpret s. 35(6), however, as being intended to prevent a challenge to the validity of the panel members' appointment, or their jurisdiction to engage in particular duties with which, they assert, they have been charged. I do not think s. 35(6) prevents the proceedings which have been commenced in this case.
Other Motions
[7]
I propose to set out the history of the proceedings to date so that another judge will not have to sift through this file.
[8]
On April 21, 1995, the applicant filed an application for judicial review of a decision by the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of the Environment made on March 24, 1995. That decision appointed an environmental assessment panel to review the applicant's Long-Range Development Plan.
[9]
On May 5, 1995, the applicant wrote to the Federal Court asking for a special hearing date for the hearing of a motion for an interim order, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, to prevent the panel members acting as such before the validity of their appointment was determined by judicial review proceeding. A draft notice of motion for this purpose accompanied that letter. The letter also indicated that counsel for the respondents had informed counsel for the applicant that the respondents planned to bring a motion of their own at the same time.
[10]
On the same day, counsel for the respondents wrote to the Federal Court Registry requesting a teleconference "to discuss scheduling of this matter and ancillary matters arising". The file was placed in front of me on May 8, 1995, and I instructed the Registry to refer it to the Associate Chief Justice's office because only the Associate Chief Justice has authority to schedule hearings or trials. At some point thereafter, counsel appear to have been advised that dates were not available but June 1 - 2, 1995, might become available.
[11]
Then, counsel for the respondents filed a motion, on May 10, 1995, returnable Monday, May 15 (a regular motions day) in Vancouver, to have the panel members struck out as respondents. This was properly served and filed within the required time period under the
Rules
. Counsel for the respondents, in a letter to the Registry, described this as a "housekeeping matter". Counsel for the respondents, on the same day, wrote to the Registry indicating that he sought to bring a further motion, to strike out the applicant's application or, alternatively, to strike out parts of the applicant's affidavits.
[12]
In response, counsel for the applicant then, on May 11, 1995, filed his motion seeking an interim order (a draft of which had been provided to the Registry on May 5) and sought to make it returnable on May 15 as well. This was not filed and served so as to provide the two clear days notice required by the
Rules
. Counsel for the respondents, on the same day, May 11, 1995, wrote to the Registry indicating that he sought to bring a further motion to strike out the applicant's application or, alternatively, to strike out parts of the applicant's affidavit. A draft of the motion was attached to that letter. A conference call with the court was requested for the purpose of settling scheduling and related matters. The matter went before the Ottawa duty judge who, as I had done earlier, recognized that since the matter involved scheduling a hearing, only the Associate Chief Justice could deal with it. He noted, however, that there was a motion which had been made returnable before the motions judge in Vancouver for May 15 and so directed that counsel's requests should be dealt with in that forum.
[13]
Counsel for the respondents, then, on May 12, 1995, filed a motion to strike out portions of the applicant's affidavits (part of the motion which he had attached to his letter of May 11, 1995). This, like the applicant's motion for an interim order, was not filed with two clear days' notice.
[14]
On May 15, 1995, the motion to strike out the three panel members, as respondents, came before me. I have dealt with it above. Counsel also sought to proceed with the two motions for which leave to proceed on the basis of short notice was required. At the same time, both counsel were aware that there was not time left during that motions day to do so. Counsel for the applicant said he was only seeking what I will call an "interim-interim order", requiring the panel members not to proceed, until his request for the full-fledged interim order could be heard. There was some evidence that the panel was threatening to issue a preliminary report within two weeks. Counsel for the applicant argued that his client would be prejudiced if, what I have called the "interim-interim order" was not granted. Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, argued that because he had been led to believe that the motions could not be heard before June 1 - 2, he was not prepared to argue even an "interim-interim order" and that to grant the applicant an "interim-interim order" in the circumstances would not be fair to him. He also argued that the applicant had not shown any irreparable harm which would arise if one were not granted, and that the matter raised by the judicial review proceeding had already been decided in previous proceedings in this court.
[15]
As I indicated to counsel for the respondent, I do not understand why the panel members could not voluntarily, for a couple of weeks, "down tools" and await a decision with respect to the validity of their appointment. What is under review, as I understand it, is the applicant's Long-Range Plan. There hardly seems to be any urgency about that. Counsel for the respondents indicated, if I understand correctly, that the reason he was reluctant to recommend such voluntary course of action was that he was not assured that the various motions could even be heard by June 1 - 2 and that, in his view, the applicant did not have a serious issue to be tried because the matters in issue had already been decided by this court.
[16]
I agree with both counsel that the pending motions should be heard together. They interrelate. Also, while argument on these issues crept into the motion to strike the panel members as respondents, which was heard on May 15, given the hurried fashion in which they were put before the court, there was an insufficient evidenciary base to allow the court to make any decision thereon. It would also, as counsel for the respondents indicated, have been unfair to him to proceed on short notice when he had been led to believe that the applicant's motion would not be heard until June 1 - 2.
[17]
It has now become clear that the dates of June 1 and 2, 1995, are available, in Calgary, for the hearing of these motions. Accordingly, an order will issue setting the two motions, which it was sought to bring on short notice, down for hearing on those dates, together with the respondents' motion to strike the judicial review proceeding completely.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/saf
[End of document]