 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patou Inc. v. Luxo Lab. Ltd. (1998), 158 F.T.R. 16 (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 .................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [1999] F.T.R. TBEd. JA.080 
 
 
 
 In The Matter Of sections 57 and 58 of the Trade-marks Act R.S.C. 1985 c. T-13; 
 
 
 
 In respect of an application for expungement of the registration of the trademark "Booster" No. TMA 026,408. 
 
 
 
 Jean Patou Inc. (applicant) v. Luxo Laboratories Limited (respondent) 
 
 (T-713-97) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Patou (Jean) Inc. v. Luxo Laboratories Ltd. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court of Canada 
 
 Trial Division 
 
 Lutfy, J. 
 
 December 30, 1998. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Jean Patou sought to expunge Luxo's registered trademark "Booster" in association with beauty and hair salon products. Alter­natively, it sought to amend the entry in the registry by adding the words "for the hair salon market" to the description of Luxo's wares. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 4048 
 
 Federal Court of Canada - Jurisdiction - Trial Division - Trademarks - Luxo was the registered owner of the trademark "Booster" in association with beauty and hair salon product - Patou asked the court to exercise its jurisdiction under s. 57(1) of the Trade-marks Act and amend the entry in the registry by adding the words "for the hair salon market" to the description of Luxo's wares - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, declined to make the requested amendment - By limiting the use of Luxo's trademark, the court would be fettering Luxo's right in a way not contemplated by ss. 19 and 57 of the Act -The power to amend the register under s. 57 was only to be exercised where a trade­mark was otherwise open to expungement - An owner had the exclus­ive right to use of its trademarks in asso­ciation with desig­nated wares throughout Canada - There was no more reason to limit the use of that right to certain market segments than to geographic regions - See paragraphs 37 to 45. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 6 
 
 Trademarks - General - Abandonment - [See  
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 889 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 261 
 
 Trademarks - What trademarks registrable - Prohibition - Marks which are descrip­tive of product - Patou sought to expunge Luxo's registered trademark "Booster" in association with beauty and hair salon products - It claimed that the word "booster" was a clearly descriptive term for the type of hair product described in Luxo's list of wares and was therefore not registrable pursuant to s. 12(1)(b) of the Trade-marks Act - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that the word "booster" was not clearly descriptive - See paragraphs 15 to 20. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 711 
 
 Trademarks - Registration - General - Amendment - [See  
 Courts - Topic 4048 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 889 
 
 Trademarks - Registration - Expungement of mark - Grounds - Lack of use or aban­donment - Patou sought to expunge Luxo's registered trademark "Booster" in associ­ation with beauty and hair salon products -It claimed that Luxo abandoned its mark through the continued use of the trademark "Booster" with the adjective "Canadian" and with a tiger-head graphic - This style of usage resulted in the cre­ation of a com­posite mark, "Canadian Booster" and Design - There was no graphic associ­ated with the trademark as registered - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that Luxo had not abandoned its trademark - "Booster" was the dominant word on the labels - The addition of "Canadian" and a tiger-head design was minor to such an extent that an unaware purchaser would be likely to infer that both, in spite of their differences, ident­ified goods having the same origin - See paragraphs 32 to 36. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 889.1 
 
 Trademarks - Registration - Expungement of mark - Grounds - Loss of distinctive­ness (incl. non-distinctiveness) - Luxo was assigned the trademark "Booster" by Cana­dian Booster - Patou sought to expunge the trademarks "Booster" in asso­ciation with beauty and hair salon products - It claimed that "Booster" was not dis­tinctive of Luxo's wares because Luxo's name did not appear on the label of the products associ­ated with the mark - "Booster" was there­fore distinctive of Canadian Booster's wares and not those of Luxo - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, rejected the assertion - The court held, inter alia, that the definition of "dis­tinctive" did not require a registered trade­mark owner to identify itself on the label of the products associated with its trade­mark - It was sufficient that the registered owner estab­lish that its trademarks were identified on, and associated only with, its wares at the time of the transfer to the customer - See paragraphs 21 to 31. 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Trade-marks Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, sect. 57 [para. 38]. 
 
 
 
 Authors and Works Noticed: 
 
 Fox, H.G., The Canadian Law of Trade Marks and Unfair Competition (3rd Ed. 1972), pp. 25 [para. 13, footnotes 5 and 6]; 282, 282 [para. 32, footnote 15]; 312 [para. 39, footnote 24]; 358 [para. 21, footnote 8]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Bruno Barrette, for the applicant; 
 
 Kenneth McKay, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Brouillette, Charpentier, Fortin, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant; 
 
 Sim, Hughes, Ashton and McKay, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Ottawa, Ontario, on October 19 and 20, 1998, by Lutfy, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on December 30, 1998. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Lutfy, J. 
 : The applicant, Jean Patou Inc., disputes the validity of the Canadian registration of the trademark "Booster" in association with beauty and hair salon products. This application to expunge the trademark "Booster" is only one of several related proceedings. 
 
 
 
 Background 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  Jean Patou Inc. is the distributor and exclusive licensee in North America of the perfumes and other beauty products of Jean Patou, S.A. of France. Patou is seeking to market, in Canada, certain of its wares under the trademark "Booster". Since 1995, Patou has launched proceedings which challenge the registration of this trademark and has filed applications for the registration of its own similar marks. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The respondent, Luxo Laboratories Limited, manufactures, distributes and sells hair care products, aftershave, bath and other beauty products. It operates from Toronto, Ontario and is the current registered owner of the trademark "Booster". 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The trademark in issue was first registered in Canada in 1920 by The Canadian Booster Company, Limited. Over the past 70 years, there have been three subsequent registered owners of this mark. In 1989, Luxo acquired its rights to the registration by way of assignment from the immediately previous registrant. Luxo's registration of the trademark "Booster" is for use in association with these wares: 
 
 
 
 "Dandruff remedy and hair tonic, hair cream, hair dressing, head rubs, aftershave, cologne, facial creams, shampoo, hair spray, cream rinse, styling lotions, atomizer dispensers." 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  On August 31, 1995, Patou filed its application to register the trademark "Booster" in association with the following wares: 
 
 
 
 "Soaps, perfumery, essential oils, hair care preparations, toiletries namely toilet water, after-shave, shaving foam, shower gel, shampoo, bath oils, bath powders, bath creams, body creams, body lotions, anti-perspirants and deodorants." 
 
 
 
 On January 16, 1996, an examiner of the Trademarks Office notified Patou that its application did not appear to be registrable because it was confusing, pursuant to s. 12(1)(d) of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 , [see footnote 1] with Luxo's mark. Hair care preparations, aftershave and shampoo were wares subsequently deleted from Patou's original application for registration. Further, Patou limited the use of its proposed trademark to "the cosmetics and perfumery markets excluding barber shop and hair salon markets". Patou's proposed application for its "Booster" trademark was then advertised. Luxo has since filed a statement of opposition and, as a result, the application is still pending before the Registrar. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  On September 27, 1995, Patou's solicitors requested that the Registrar issue a notice pursuant to s. 45 requiring Luxo to show that its trademark was in use in Canada, with respect to its specified wares, during the previous three years. After reviewing Luxo's affidavit evidence and the parties' submissions, the senior hearing officer concluded that Luxo had established use of its mark concerning certain, but not all, of its wares. Her two principal conclusions were stated as follows: 
 
 
 
 "a) ... [as] the evidence shows use by [Luxo] during the relevant period of the trademark 'Booster' ... in association with 'dandruff remedy and hair tonic, hair cream, aftershave, facial cream, styling lotion and shampoo', I conclude that the registration ought to be maintained for such wares. [see footnote 2] 
 
 
 
 "b) ... as the evidence fails to show use with the wares 'hair dressing, head rubs, cologne, hair spray, cream rinse and atomizer dispensers', I conclude that such wares ought to be deleted from the statement of wares in the registration." [see footnote 3] 
 
 
 
 Both Luxo and Patou have appealed this decision to the Federal Court of Canada. [see footnote 4] Neither appeal has yet been heard. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  On April 11, 1997, Patou applied for the registration of the trademark "Jean Patou Booster" and Design in association with the same wares specified in its application of August 31, 1995 for the trademark "Booster", supra, paragraph 5. The application does not disclaim the exclusive right to the use of the word "booster". Nor does the application, unlike Patou's earlier application for the registration of "Booster", limit the marketing of the products, designated in the proposed statement of wares, to any specific market. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  On April 16, 1997, Patou filed this application under s. 57 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 . Patou seeks: (a) an order expunging Luxo's trademark "Booster"; or (b) an order amending the entry in the register by adding the words "for the hair salon market" to the description of Luxo's wares. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Finally, on April 29, 1997, Luxo received a notice issued by the Registrar pursuant to s. 44 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
  requiring it to provide information concerning its trademark "Booster", as if an application to register that mark was being made on the date of the request. 
 
 
 
 The Issues 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Patou's application for the expungement of the trademark "Booster" raises two issues: (a) was the trademark "Booster" distinctive of Luxo's wares when this proceeding was commenced, pursuant to s. 18(1)(b) of the  
 Act 
 ; and (b) if so, has Luxo abandoned the trademark through non-use, pursuant to s. 18(1)(c) of the  
 Act 
 ? 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  If the trademark is found to be valid and is not expunged, Patou seeks an order from this court amending the entry in the register so that Luxo's use of its trademark in association with its wares be limited "for the hair salon market". This raises two further issues, namely, the jurisdiction of this court to grant this relief and the appropriateness of doing so in this case. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Both parties agree that Patou is an interested person within the meaning of s. 57 and that the relevant date to determine the issue of distinctiveness is April 16, 1997, the date this proceeding was commenced. 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  It has been said that distinctiveness is the essence of any protectable trademark and as such is the foundation of trade mark law. [see footnote 5] In his authoritative work on the law of trademarks, Dr. Fox notes: "[t]he fundamental idea of a trademark is that it shall indicate that a purchaser may take that mark as a warranty that the goods stamped with it have come from the particular source of the goods with which he has hitherto been pleased." [see footnote 6] If a trademark loses its distinctiveness, the reasons underlying its protection cease to exist and it is liable to be expunged according to s. 57(1) of the  
 Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 Is The Trademark "Booster" Distinctive 
 
 Of Luxo's Wares? 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Patou claims that the trademark "Booster" registered to Luxo has lost its distinctiveness for one or more of the following reasons: (i) it is clearly descriptive of the wares it is associated with; and (ii) it is not distinctive of the wares of the registered owner but of its predecessor in title. 
 
 
 
 i) Is The Word "Booster" Clearly Descriptive Of Luxo's Wares? 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Section 12(1)(b) provides that a trademark is not registrable if it is "clearly descriptive ... of the character or quality of the wares ... with which it is used". 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  On the evidence, Patou has not established that the word "booster" is a clearly descriptive term for the type of hair care products described in Luxo's list of wares. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  First, the affidavit evidence provided by Patou is limited in scope. The affidavit of an investigator hired by Patou affirmed that one individual, when responding to a telephone query, disclosed that she sold Luxo's "Booster" products only after being prompted by a supplementary request for "Canadian Booster" products. Even if this hearsay evidence were admissible, it is anecdotal and is limited to the experience of one person. As such, it is not sufficient to establish that the word "booster" is clearly descriptive. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Patou also provided a direct statement from an individual who sells "Curl Booster" but not Luxo's products. This statement is no more relevant to the issue of "clearly descriptive" than is the list of almost 50 registered marks containing the word "booster". "Booster" has been disclaimed in approximately 10 of these registrations and only once in the beauty product industry: "Avon Collagen Booster". In that instance, "Booster" is used as the nominative form of the verb "to boost" to describe what the Avon product will do in a generic or descriptive sense. In the case of Luxo's registration, there is no evidence that "Booster" describes the action of any of its products. The mark, therefore, is not used in a descriptive manner. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Finally, the dictionary entries introduced by the parties do not define "booster" in relation to hair products. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  In summary, while "Booster" may be a weak mark, as evidenced by the number of current registrations, I cannot conclude that the word is clearly descriptive. This finding is consistent with Patou's own decision to seek its registration of the trademark "Booster" and its failure to voluntarily disclaim "Booster" in its subsequent application to register "Jean Patou Booster" and Design. 
 
 
 
 ii) Is The Trademark "Booster" Distinctive Of The Wares Sold By Luxo Or Those Of The Original Registrant, The Canadian Booster Company, Limited? 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The definition of "trademark" [see footnote 7] has two principal components: the mark must be "used" by its owner; and, it must distinguish the goods or services of its owner, be they "manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed", from the goods or services of others. According to this definition, the registrant of a trademark may be, like the respondent in this case, a manufacturer or a seller of the wares associated with the mark. [see footnote 8] The  
 Act 
  also sets out the definitions of "distinctive", "use" and "deemed use" as follows: 
 
 
 
 "'distinctive', in relation to a trademark, means a trademark that actually distinguishes the wares or services in association with which it is used by its owner from the wares or services of others or is adapted so to distinguish them; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "'use', in relation to a trademark, means any use that by s. 4 is deemed to be a use in association with wares or services; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 " 
 When deemed to be used 
 
 
 
 "4(1) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of the wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred." 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  In support of its submissions that "Booster" is not distinctive of the products marketed by Luxo, Patou argues that "Booster" does not distinguish Luxo's wares from those of others because its name does not appear on the label of the products associated with the mark. The resulting public perception is that Luxo is not the source of the goods associated with the trademark "Booster" but a mere distributor of those wares. Any benefit or good will arising from the use of the mark has, therefore, accrued to the benefit of The Canadian Booster Company, Limited and not to its successor in title Luxo. Accordingly, Patou argues, the trademark does not distinguish the wares sold by Luxo within the meaning of "distinctive" set out in s. 2 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  Patou referred to several cases in which a trademark was held to be invalid after it was assigned by the original registrant to a subsidiary or distributor. In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED a trademark was expunged where the foreign manufacturer assigned its rights to the Canadian registration of its trademark to its wholly owned Canadian subsidiary. The Exchequer Court found that because the assignor continued selling its wares to a different Canadian importer the mark was not distinctive of the wares of the assignee. Similarly, in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED products associated with an identical trademark were available from more than one source and the mark was found not to be distinctive of the registered owner's wares. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  In this case, Luxo holds its rights to "Booster" as a result of a series of assignments originating in 1974 when The Canadian Booster Company, Limited, a corporate entity that ceased to exist in 1976, assigned the mark to one of Luxo's predecessors in title. The public cannot be misled into thinking that the product it is purchasing today originates in a company that was dissolved 22 years ago. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  Patou argues forcefully that Luxo's name appears on none of its labels. From this, Patou urges that the trademark "Booster" is distinctive of the wares of The Canadian Booster Company, Limited and not those of Luxo. The labels attached to "Booster" products include this information: 
 
 
 
 The Canadian Booster Company 
 
 Toronto, Canada M5G 1C3 
 
 Made in Canada 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  Firstly, there is nothing in the definition of "distinctive", or in s. 4(1), that requires the registered owner of a trademark to identify itself on the label of the products with which it associates its trademark. It is sufficient that the registered owner establish that its trademark is identified on, and associated  
 only 
  with, its wares at the time of the transfer to the customer. There is no evidence in this case of a second source of "Booster" products. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  Secondly, Luxo's use of "The Canadian Booster Company" reflects Luxo's own registration of that trade name in December 1995. [see footnote 11] The postal code used on the labels of "Booster" products includes the location of Luxo's premises. This information accurately represents, upon verification of the appropriate trade name register if necessary, the current ownership of the trademark. Patou has proffered no evidence of public deception or confusion arising from the similarity between Luxo's registered trading style and the name of a company that has not existed for over two decades. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  The facts of this case are also distinguishable from those found in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED where the assignee sold foreign-made pianos marked with the Heintzmann name and of an apparently inferior quality. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED I have not understood the relevance of  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  to this case. There is no evidence of any difference in the quality between the products marketed by Luxo and those sold by the original registrant; nor is there evidence of other entities marketing products under the same trademark in the marketplace. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  Patou has also failed to establish that Luxo is perceived by consumers as a mere distributor of the products of The Canadian Booster Company, Limited. Again, this corporate entity has not existed for over 20 years. The affidavit of Patou's investigator suggesting that [TRANSLATION] "the 'Booster' or 'Canadian Booster' products appear to be manufactured by Canadian Booster Company" can only reflect an uninformed perusal of Luxo's product labels and nothing more. The evidence discloses no other source for Luxo's products. There is no evidence of consumer deception or of the existence of a multiplicity of sources. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  Even if the respondent were a mere distributor, the trademark "Booster" is registrable by it as long as it is distinctive of its wares. [see footnote 13] Again, Patou relies on case law in which the facts do not resemble those in this proceeding. In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED a United Kingdom manufacturer of chinaware obtained the expungement of the registration of its mark by its former Canadian distributor. The registration was made without the consent of the U.K. manufacturer. The distributor sold no other products, either its own or those of other manufacturers, under the same name. The mark was found 
  to be distinctive of the wares of the manufacturer and not those of the distributor. In this case, there is no evidence to suggest that there is any source, other than Luxo, of the products associated with the trademark "Booster". The original registrant ceased to exist in 1976 after validly assigning its mark to a third party in 1974. Luxo, is the sole entity benefiting from the use of the "Booster" trademark. 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  In summary, Patou has not established that the mark "Booster" is distinctive of the wares of an entity other than Luxo. The evidence has not persuaded me that "Booster" is not distinctive of Luxo's wares. 
 
 
 
 Has The Trademark "Booster" Been 
 
 Abandoned Through Non-use? 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  Abandonment is a question of fact to be determined according to the circumstances of each case. The party asserting abandonment must prove both actual non-use of the mark and an intent, on the part of the registered owner, to abandon the mark. [see footnote 15] The jurisprudence recognizes that proof of non-use may be made where a trademark owner's use of its mark deviates from the registered form of the mark. [see footnote 16] In this case, Patou argues that Luxo and its predecessors in title have abandoned their mark through the continued use of the trademark "Booster" with the adjective "Canadian" and with what appears to be a stylized tiger-head graphic. Patou claims that this style of usage has resulted in the creation of a composite mark, namely, "Canadian Booster" and Design. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  There is no graphic associated with the trademark "Booster" as registered. The labels show that Luxo frequently, but not consistently, uses "Booster" in combination with the word "Canadian" and with a graphic representation. Even so, "Booster" is the dominant word on the labels. It is printed across the label in a stylized font that is significantly larger than any other word or graphic on the label. The word "Canadian" is generally found above the word "Booster" in a much smaller font. The tiger's head appears in the upper area of the label. Two different depictions of the tiger head are found on the labels. One version is more realistic and is larger in size while the other is smaller and more stylized. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  Patou relies on the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED to support its submissions. In that case, the respondent owned three registered trademarks: "CII, Honeywell" and "Bull". The Court of Appeal concluded that the use of "CII" "Honeywell Bull" did not establish "use" of the individual mark "Bull" but formed a new, composite trademark. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [35] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED it was held that a registrant's consistent use of the trademark "Standard" in combination with the word "tuner" constituted "use" within the meaning of the  
 Act 
 . In the words of FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED [see footnote 20] 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  Finally, in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED , observed that Canadian trademark law FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED of a trademark. In my view, "Booster" is the dominant image communicated by Luxo's labels. The addition of "Canadian" and a tiger-head design to the label is minor to such an extent that FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED [see footnote 22] Patou raised the same issue in its s. 45 proceeding. The senior hearing officer also concluded that FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED [see footnote 23] In my opinion, the public would perceive the mark "Booster" as being used despite the addition of other words or graphics to the label. Patou has thus failed to demonstrate that, at the material date, the trademark "Booster" had lost its identity through association either with the word "Canadian" or with the tiger-head graphic. Accordingly, Patou has not established that Luxo has abandoned its trademark through non-use, or ever intended to do so. 
 
 
 
 Does This Court Have Jurisdiction To Limit Luxo's Use Of Its Trademark "Booster" To "The Hair Salon Market" By Amending The Statement Of Wares Associated With The Mark? 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  This issue arises only if I find, as I have, that Patou's application to have Luxo's trademark "Booster" struck from the register fails. If the mark is found to be validly registered Patou asks, in the alternative, that this court exercise its jurisdiction under s. 57(1) and amend the register by adding the words "for the hair salon market" to Luxo's description of the wares associated with "Booster". 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  Section 57(1) provides: 
 
 
 
 "57(1) The Federal Court has exclusive original jurisdiction, on the application of the Registrar or of any person interested, to order that any entry in the register be struck out or amended on the ground that at the date of the application the entry as it appears on the register does not accurately express or define  
 the existing rights 
  of the person appearing to be the registered owner of the mark." (emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  This court has a broad supervisory power over the register of trademarks and may expunge or amend any entry on the register which ceases to "accurately express or define the existing rights" of the apparent owner. Dr. Fox states: 
 
 
 
 "The court ... has power (1) to expunge an entry in its entirety; (2) to expunge part or parts of an entry; (3) to order the entry of a disclaimer as to a part of a mark; or (4) to vary its form whether the entry relates to a mark or to any other matter, as for example an assignment. The court thus has the power to amend the registration of a trade mark in any way it may see fit as, for example, by removing an objectionable part contained in it." [see footnote 24] (References omitted) 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  It is acknowledged that rights in a trademark arise according to its use. [see footnote 25] With this principle in mind, Patou requests that this court amend the statement of wares associated with "Booster" to reflect Luxo's  
 actual 
  use of its trademark. Specifically, Patou seeks a limitation of Luxo's use of "Booster" to the "hair salon market" on the premise that Luxo has sold its "Booster" products only in that particular market. 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  Moreover, Patou argues that aside from giving Luxo greater rights than it is entitled to, the over-broad statement of wares hinders the free flow of commerce and is detrimental to the public interest. To be fair, however, Luxo's existing statement of wares also prevents Patou from registering its own trademark and exposes Patou to an action for infringement under s. 20 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 [42] 
  According to s. 19 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 , the owner of the trademark has the exclusive right to the use  
 throughout Canada 
  of the trademark in respect of those wares or services. In my view, by limiting the use of Luxo's trademark in the manner sought by Patou, the court would be fettering Luxo's rights in a way not contemplated by ss. 19 and 57 of the  
 Act 
 . Patou's reliance on the Supreme Court of Canada decision in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED only serves to reinforce my view in this regard. In that case, the Supreme Court restricted the use of a mark to a specific territorial area within Canada after it was found to be invalid. The amendment was based on s. 32(2) of the  
 Act 
 , pursuant to which the registration of an otherwise invalid, descriptive mark, can be maintained if it is restricted to the "defined territorial area in Canada in which the trademark is shown to have become distinctive". There is no other provision in the  
 Act 
  which enables this court to amend the register pursuant to s. 57(1) in a manner which would restrict Luxo's existing rights as set out in s. 19. In my opinion, the power to amend the register as set out in s. 57(1) is only to be exercised where a trademark is otherwise open to expungement. The ability to amend the register in this way allows the court to save an otherwise invalid mark and not to restrict the existing rights of the registered owner of a valid mark. 
 
 
 
 [43] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED the Court of Appeal confirmed the rights of the registered owner of a trademark throughout Canada, even in regions where those rights had yet to be used: 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 As I understand this statement of the Court of Appeal, the registered owner's exclusive right to the use of its trademark throughout Canada is not limited by the marketing methods employed, any more than it is limited geographically. 
 
 
 
 [44] 
  The owner of the trademark has the exclusive right to its use, in association with the designated wares, throughout Canada. There is no more reason to limit the use of that right to certain market segments than to geographic regions. In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED my colleague Justice Dubé provided the same overall market protection to Fabergé's trademark "Eminence" when he stated: 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Although he was considering the likelihood of confusion and not s. 19 specifically, his conclusion can readily be applied to the facts of this case. Here, the affidavit of the vice-president of Luxo suggests that the company may extend its presence beyond the hair salon and barber shop market to the drug store and mass merchandising sectors. [see footnote 31] 
 
 
 
 [45] 
  I have serious doubts that s. 57(1) contemplates the exercise of this court's jurisdiction where "the existing rights" of the register owner of the trademark are no longer in issue. In any event, the circumstances of this case do not warrant the amendment sought by Patou to limit Luxo's rights to certain markets. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [46] 
  This application for expungement is dismissed. The applicant has failed to establish that the trademark "Booster", registered to Luxo Laboratories Limited, is invalid pursuant to ss. 18(1)(b) or 18(1)(c) of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 . Similarly, the circumstances of this case do not warrant an amendment to the register concerning this trademark, pursuant to s. 57(1). Costs will be to the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Jocelyne M. Caissie/saf 
 
 
 
 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 1. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 2.  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 5. H.G. Fox,  
 The Canadian Law of Trade Marks and Unfair Competition 
  (3d) (Toronto: Carswell, 1972) at p. 25. 
 
 
 
 6. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 7. Section 2 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 , supra, footnote 1. 
 
 
 
 8. No evidence was lead as to whether Luxo manufactures the products associated with the trademark "Booster". This is not relevant in light of the definition of "trademark" in s. 2 of the  
 Act 
 . See  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , supra, footnote 5, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED See also:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 9. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 10. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 11. On December 18, 1995, Luxo Laboratories Ltd. registered "The Canadian Booster Co." as one of its trading names, according to the provisions of the  
 Ontario Business Names Act 
 , R.S.O. 1990, c. B-17. 
 
 
 
 12. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 13. Supra, footnote 8. 
 
 
 
 14. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 15. Supra, footnote 5, at pp. 281-282. 
 
 
 
 16. See for example  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 18. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED . 
 
 
 
 19. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 20. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
  
 
 
 
 21. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 22. Supra, footnote 18 at p. 409. 
 
 
 
 23. Supra, footnote 2 at p. 4. 
 
 
 
 24. Supra, footnote 5 at p. 312. 
 
 
 
 25.  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , supra, footnote 5 at p. 49. 
 
 
 
 26. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 27. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 28. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 29. (FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 30. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED but it is not apparent to me that the issue of the court's jurisdiction pursuant to s. 57(1) was vigorously contested in that case. 
 
 
 
 31. The affidavit of Luxo's vice-president states at paragraph 12: "Luxo sells its 'Booster' products to the barber shop and hair salon industry (wholesale and retail) as well as directly to the public through outlets such as Toronto Barber & Beauty Supply Ltd. Our market is not limited to the hair salon industry and we continually strive to have a market presence in the drug store and mass merchandising sectors." 
 
 
 

