 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ajelal v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2014), 468 F.T.R. 173 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2014] F.T.R. TBEd. DE.010 
 
 
 
 Mustafa Ajelal (applicant) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent) 
 
 (IMM-4522-13; 2014 FC 1093) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Ajelal v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Diner, J. 
 
 November 19, 2014. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 While in Canada, Ajelal, a 33 year-old citizen of Libya, applied for refugee protection based upon his fear that he would be targeted because of his ethnic heritage and political opinions. The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board rejected his claim, finding that he had a viable internal flight alternative (IFA) in two areas of Libya. Ajelal applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application, and remitted the matter for redetermination. The Board's failure to consider all grounds made in the claim, under either s. 96 or s. 97 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, was a breach of procedural fairness. In any event, the Board's finding that Ajelal had a viable IFA was unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Persecution - Protection of country of nationality or citizenship (internal flight alternative) - While in Canada, Ajelal, a citizen of Libya, applied for refugee protection based upon his fear that he would be targeted because of his ethnic heritage and political opinions - The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board rejected his claim, finding that he had a viable internal flight alternative (IFA) in two areas of Libya - Ajelal applied for judicial review - The Federal Court allowed the application - The Board's failure to consider all grounds made in the claim, under either s. 96 or s. 97 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, was a breach of procedural fairness - "It is not for this Court to analyze and adjudicate the refugee claim; that is the role of the Board, which it did not undertake in this case." - In any event, the Board's finding that Ajelal had a viable IFA was unreasonable - Given the Board's emphasis on IFAs and the absence of any other substantive analysis, the evidence contrary to its conclusions should have been addressed. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Jared Will, for the applicant; 
 
 Lorne McCleneghan, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 The Law Offices of Jared Will, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application for judicial review was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on October 16, 2014, before Diner, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment and reasons, dated November 19, 2014. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I.  
 Overview 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Diner, J. 
 : This is an application for the judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [RPD, Board], made pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
  [ 
 IRPA 
 ], wherein the Board determined that the Applicant is neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  In short, the Applicant submits that the Board took too many shortcuts before coming to the conclusion above. The Board failed to properly analyze the underlying issues with respect to an internal flight alternative [IFA] in the Applicant's native country of Libya. This Court agrees that there were gaps in the analysis which require the matter to be sent back to the Board for reconsideration. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The Applicant is a 33-year-old citizen of Libya, from Tripoli. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  When the civil war broke out in Libya in February 2011, he was living and studying in Montreal, having previously obtained a student visa. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  Due to the political and security developments in his home country, the Applicant became afraid to return to that country, fearful that he would be targeted as a result of his Amazigh ethnicity and the inter-factional violence. He made a claim for refugee protection in Canada on August 22, 2011. On October 6, 2011, he filed his Personal Information Form [PIF] with the RPD. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The situation in Libya deteriorated in the period between October 2011 and March 2013, when the claim was heard by the RPD. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  In this period, the Applicant had become the object of death threats because he expressed his opinions in internet forums about the rights of his people, the Amazigh, and about the importance of the new government being secular and civilian. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  On February 18, 2013, the Applicant filed amendments to his PIF, describing these developments, and setting out his concerns based on his activities while in Canada. Specifically, his submissions cited: the deteriorating situation in Libya; the fact that he had spoken out publicly against the government in Libya (i.e. in support of a civilian/secular government); personal threats he had received via email; and the breakdown of the Libya's ability to protect him. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Decision 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Board did not raise the Applicant's credibility as an issue, and accepted his identity as a member of the Amazigh minority. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  While taking note of the documentary evidence concerning improvements for the Amazigh community in the post-Gaddafi era, the Board did not determine whether or not the Applicant would face persecution on the basis of his ethnicity if he were to return to his home in Tripoli. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The sole determinative finding by the Board was that the Applicant could benefit from a reasonable IFA in either the Jabel Nefoussa region of Libya or in the town of Zouara, Libya, and that he was not therefore entitled to international protection. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The Board neither assessed the risk of persecution on the basis of political opinion or ethnic heritage pursuant to s. 96 of  
 IRPA 
 , nor did it assess the risks pursuant to s. 97 of  
 IRPA 
 . 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The Board had both documentary and oral evidence regarding the Applicant's ethnicity and his political opinions, upon which it had a duty to consider whether the Applicant faced persecution under s. 96, or risks under s. 97. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The Applicant produced a variety of documentary evidence outlining the deterioration of conditions in Libya after the ouster and death of Colonel Ghaddafi, evidencing his objective fear of persecution and the attendant lack of state protection at the time. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  The Applicant also produced evidence outlining personal threats against him due to the political opinions he espoused while in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Furthermore, when questioned by the Board, he explained the difficulties he would face in Libya should he return to that country, including personal threats against him, both in Tripoli and beyond (Certified Tribunal Record, pp. 316, 318-324). 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  All of this evidence was consistent with the evidence provided in both the original PIF, as well as the amended PIF. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Board, as mentioned above, made no credibility findings with respect to either the objective or subjective testimony. Rather, the RPD found that the Applicant could find a safe haven in the two areas of Libya mentioned above in paragraph 11. The Applicant, however, testified and provided documentary evidence demonstrating fear was throughout Libya, rather than solely in Tripoli, given the deterioration of governance and protection available in the country. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  The first error made in this matter, therefore, is that the Board failed to consider all grounds made in the claim, under either s. 96 or s. 97. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  This fundamental pillar of refugee law dates back to the seminal case of  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, where the Court confirmed that the Board must consider all of the relevant grounds for making a claim for refugee status. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  Justice Rennie wrote about this error of procedural fairness in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [22] 
  In the present case, the Board did not consider the underlying basis of the Refugee claim, on any of the enumerated grounds in s. 96. It is not for this Court to analyze and adjudicate the refugee claim; that is the role of the Board, which it did not undertake in this case. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  The same comments can be made with respect to the risks faced under s. 97. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  As Justice Rennie stated in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [25] 
  The error may not have necessarily been fatal if the Applicant's credibility was impugned, because the factual basis of the claim could have been said to be unsupported by the testimony: see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. In this case, however, there was nothing which supported the failure to consider the Applicant's s. 96 and s. 97 claims for protection. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  Finally, even if I am wrong on the above, such that there was no denial of procedural fairness for failure to consider the underlying elements of the claim, then the IFA finding falls because the Board was unreasonable in its IFA analysis. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  The leading case on IFA is  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, where the Court of Appeal held at paras 13 and 14: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [28] 
  There was evidence before the Board, by way of an email threat, addressed directly and solely to the Applicant, that he would be killed should he come through Tripoli airport. If the Board wanted him to reach either of the two IFAs, it failed to state how he would avoid going through Tripoli airport, or alternate routes to attend the places of supposed safe haven. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  Furthermore, the Board failed to address the evidence of the Applicant in which he said that the threat against him extended beyond Tripoli to other areas of the country. This evidence directly contradicted the Board's finding that the Applicant would not face persecution in the purported IFAs. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  In this case, given the Board's emphasis on IFAs and the absence of any other substantive analysis, the evidence contrary to its conclusions should have been addressed. The Court of Appeal held in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [31] 
  The Federal Court has followed a similar approach on numerous occasions: See for instance,  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. I see no reason that the Court should take any different approach in this matter. 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  The decision, for all the reasons above, will be sent back for reconsideration. The parties sought no questions for certification, nor did they raise any cost award requests. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [33] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
  the application for judicial review is allowed. The matter will be sent back to the Board for redetermination. No questions will be certified and there is no order for costs. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: E. Joanne Oley/nmg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




