 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Can. (M.C.I.) v. Zhang (2011), 393 F.T.R. 252 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2011] F.T.R. TBEd. JL.053 
 
 
 
 The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (applicant) v. Zhao Zhang (respondent) 
 
 (T-1586-10; 2011 FC 844) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Zhang 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Tremblay-Lamer, J. 
 
 July 7, 2011. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 A citizenship judge granted Zhang citizenship. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration appealed from the decision on the basis that the citizenship judge erred in finding that Zhang had met the residency requirement under s. 5(1)(c) of the Citizenship Act. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the appeal. The decision of the citizenship judge was set aside and Zhang's application for Canadian citizenship was refused. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2525 
 
 Naturalization - Qualifications - Residence - A citizenship judge granted Zhang citizenship - The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration appealed from the decision on the basis that the citizenship judge erred in finding that Zhang had met the residency requirement under s. 5(1)(c) of the Citizenship Act - The Federal Court allowed the appeal - Without explicitly referring to it, the citizenship judge applied the qualitative test for residence set out in FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, asking himself whether Canada was the country in which Zhang had centralized her life and answering that question in the affirmative - The Koo test was not reasonably applied in this case - Relevant facts and evidence were not properly assessed by the citizenship judge - The conclusion of the citizenship judge that Zhang had centralized her life in Canada was unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Citizenship Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29, sect. 5(1)(c) [para. 5]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Hilla Aharon, for the applicant; 
 
 Zhao Zhang, self-represented. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the applicant. 
 
 
 
 This appeal was heard on July 5, 2011, at Vancouver, British Columbia, before Tremblay-Lamer, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following decision on July 7, 2011. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Tremblay-Lamer, J. 
 : This is an appeal by the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (the Minister) pursuant to subsection 14(5) of the  
 Citizenship Act 
 , RSC 1985, c C-29 [ 
 Citizenship Act 
 ], from the decision of a citizenship judge, dated August 4, 2010, granting the respondent citizenship, on the basis that the citizenship judge erred in finding that the respondent had met the residency requirement under paragraph 5(1)(c) of the  
 Citizenship Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 I.  
 Background 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The respondent is a citizen of China. On March 1, 1999, she entered Canada and was landed as a permanent resident. She submitted her application for Canadian citizenship on May 6, 2008. On July 7, 2010, the respondent appeared before the citizenship judge and on August 4, 2010, he approved her application. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Decision under Appeal 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Without explicitly referring to it, the citizenship judge applied the qualitative test for residence set out by Justice Barbara Reed in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, asking himself whether Canada was the country in which the respondent had centralized her life and answering that question in the affirmative. He found that the respondent spent substantial time in Canada before the relevant four-year period, that her absences were exclusively caused by her husband's employment in Japan, noting that she is Chinese and has no other ties to Japan. He also noted that her husband and her two daughters are Canadian, and that she had a third daughter who was deceased who had lived in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The citizenship judge also based his conclusion on the fact that the respondent had investments, a car, and insurance in Canada, and on the fact that the respondent had a British Columbia driver's licence, a local bank account, a Nanaimo park and recreation membership, etc. He also took into account her efforts to qualify in Canada as a chartered accountant, the fact that her husband's company was Canadian, and her involvement with different organizations in Nanaimo. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Issue 
 
 
 
 Did the citizenship judge err in finding that the respondent met the residence requirement set out in paragraph 5(1)(c) of the  
 Citizenship Act 
 ? 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The residence requirement set out in paragraph 5(1)(c) of the  
 Citizenship Act 
  requires an applicant to have accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada during the four years immediately preceding the date of his or her application: 
 
 
 
 Grant of citizenship 
 
 
 
 5. (1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (c) is a permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, and has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his or her application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada calculated in the following manner: 
 
 
 
 (i) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada before his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one-half of a day of residence, and 
 
 
 
 (ii) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada after his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one day of residence; 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 Attribution de la citoyenneté 
 
 
 
 5. (1) Le ministre attribue la citoyenneté à toute personne qui, à la fois: 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 c) est un résident permanent au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés et a, dans les quatre ans qui ont précédé la date de sa demande, résidé au Canada pendant au moins trois ans en tout, la durée de sa résidence étant calculée de la manière suivante: 
 
 
 
 (i) un demi-jour pour chaque jour de résidence au Canada avant son admission à titre de résident permanent, 
 
 
 
 (ii) un jour pour chaque jour de résidence au Canada après son admission à titre de résident permanent; 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The meaning of the word "residence" has been interpreted by this Court in a number of ways. Associate Chief Justice FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED held that a person who had FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED could leave for periods of time and still be regarded as having been resident in Canada for the purposes of the  
 Citizenship Act 
 . On the other hand, in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED interpreted the residence requirement more narrowly as requiring the applicant to have been physically present in Canada for at least three of the four years prior to the application. In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , above, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED described the appropriate test as being, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. She set out six non-exhaustive questions to assist in answering this question. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Although it is sometimes said that there are three tests for residence, the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test, the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test and the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test, as FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED recently pointed out in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [8] 
  In the current case, the Minister did not argue that the citizenship judge erred in applying the wrong test to determine residence - i.e. he did not argue that the quantitative physical presence test should have been applied, as opposed to the qualitative test from  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 . Indeed, in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED held that it was open to the citizenship judge to apply either of the tests, so long as the chosen test was applied properly. While there has been some recent disagreement on the question of whether or not more than one test is permissible (Justice Robert Barnes in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED and FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED found that the qualitative  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test was the  
 correct 
  test to apply, whileFRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED found that the quantitative  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test was the  
 correct 
  test to apply), it is not necessary for me to address this issue on the current appeal. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Minister's argument in the current case was simply that the citizenship judge erred in the way that he applied the qualitative  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test. This is a question of mixed fact and law to which the reasonableness standard of review ought to be applied ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). As discussed below, I find that the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test was not reasonably applied in this case and, as such, it is unnecessary for me to consider the threshold question of whether or not a different test ought to have been applied. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  As discussed, the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  test asks whether it can be said that Canada is the place where the applicant "regularly, normally or customarily lives". The six questions that can be asked to assist in this determination were set out by Justice Reed as follows: 
 
 
 
 (1) was the individual physically present in Canada for a long period prior to recent absences which occurred immediately before the application for citizenship; 
 
 
 
 (2) where are the applicant's immediate family and dependents (and extended family) resident; 
 
 
 
 (3) does the pattern of physical presence in Canada indicate a returning home or merely visiting the country; 
 
 
 
 (4) what is the extent of the physical absences - if an applicant is only a few days short of the 1095 day total it is easier to find deemed residence than if those absences are extensive; 
 
 
 
 (5) is the physical absence caused by a clearly temporary situation such as employment as a missionary abroad, following a course of study abroad as a student, accepting temporary employment abroad, accompanying a spouse who has accepted temporary employment abroad; 
 
 
 
 (6) what is the quality of the connection with Canada: is it more substantial than that which exists with any other country. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  On the first question, the Minister points out that the respondent was not, in fact, physically present in Canada for a long period prior to the relevant four years and, as such, he argues that the citizenship judged erred by describing the time she spent in Canada prior to the relevant period as being "substantial". He points out that the respondent was, in fact, physically present in Canada for only 1568 days (or slightly less than 4.5 years) over a period of 11 years. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  I agree with the Minister that the citizen judge's treatment of this question is of particular concern. I note that in the residence questionnaire, the respondent stated at question 9 that she worked from November 2001 to March 2006 in Tokyo, Japan; this is almost 3.5 years spent outside of Canada for employment purposes. Moreover, the table labelled "Zhao Zhang Record of Days stayed inside Canada," which was also before the citizenship judge, indicates that the respondent had spent only 821 days in Canada between her arrival on March 1, 1999 and May 2004, or approximately two years and three months over a five-year period. I have difficulty understanding how this could be deemed as a "substantial time in Canada before the four year period." 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  On the second question, the Minister argues that the citizenship judge failed to consider the fact that the respondent had no family actually living in Canada: her daughters were attending school in Japan, her husband was working in Japan, her parents and brother were resident in China, while her sister was resident in Seattle. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  I also agree with the Minister on this point. The citizenship judge mentioned the fact that the respondent's daughters were born in Canada, but failed to consider that they attended school in Japan and that the respondent, at the time, had no close family in Canada as her parents and brother resided in China and her sister in Seattle. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  On the third question, the Minister takes issue with the citizen judge's conclusion that the respondent's pattern of physical presence in Canada indicated a returning home as opposed to merely visiting the country. The Minister notes that the respondent worked in Japan from November 2001 until March 2006 and that most of her trips to Canada coincided with her children's summer and Christmas holidays. I agree that this is a concern as well. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  On the fifth question, I agree with the Minister that the citizenship judge failed to consider that the respondent's absences from Canada during the relevant period were structural in nature and not merely temporary. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  On the sixth question, the Minister submits that the passive indicia mentioned by the citizenship judge - such as her driver's licence, her Canadian investments, etc. - are insufficient to demonstrate a substantial connection to Canada. According to the Minister, the citizenship judge should have compared the respondent's connection to Canada with her connection to Japan. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  I agree with the Minister that the mere existence of "passive" indicia such as income tax returns, medical insurance, bank accounts, are not on their own sufficient to demonstrate a substantial connection ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Thus, it is clear from the decision that relevant facts and evidence were not properly assessed by the citizenship judge. The conclusion of the citizenship judge that the respondent had centralized her life in Canada was unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  For these reasons, the appeal must be allowed. The decision of the citizenship judge is set aside and the respondent's application for Canadian citizenship is refused. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [21] 
   
 THIS COURT ADJUDGES that 
  the appeal is allowed. The decision of the citizenship judge is set aside and Ms. Zhang's application for Canadian citizenship is refused. 
 
 
 
 Appeal allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Angela E. McKay/vnh 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




