[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of an immigration officer on November 20, 1992, such that insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds existed to warrant processing of the applicant's request for landing pursuant to s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
.
Facts
[2]
The applicant is a Sri Lankan Tamil from the Jaffna district. She arrived in Canada via Buffalo, New York on 17 July 1991 and claimed refugee status, which was denied by the CRDD on 24 March 1992. On 12 May 1992 she had a son in Canada. The son's father is a landed immigrant, but he cannot sponsor her because he is still married. He has been separated from his wife since he came to Canada in 1985 and does not know where she is. Divorce proceedings have been begun and he plans to marry the applicant as soon as he can.
[3]
The applicant received a letter dated 2 November, 1992, directing her to report for removal on 26 November, 1992. By a letter dated 17 November her solicitor requested a pre-removal humanitarian review and forwarded written submissions and documentation in support of this request. On 20 November, 1992, the manager at the Niagara CIC determined that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to warrant processing from within Canada. Reasons for the decision were forwarded to the applicant's solicitor on 23 November.
Issues:
[4]
At issue is the immigration officer's decision of 20 November, 1992. The relevant part of the letter is as follows:
"Your submission as well as other information on file was carefully and sympathetically reviewed in order to evaluate the merits of Ms. Thangarani Sellakkandu's case. Insufficient grounds exist to warrant processing of Mr. Navaratnam [sic] application in Canada, pursuant to s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
."
The immigration officer's reasons of 23 November are detailed and they provide a list of every factor or piece of evidence considered.
[5]
The following are the issues to be resolved:
(1) Whether the immigration officer exceeded her jurisdiction in exercising her statutory power of decision-making unreasonably on the evidence before her and in fettering her discretion;
(2) Whether the immigration officer failed to comply with the duty to act fairly towards the applicant in the consideration of her request for humanitarian relief from removal; and
(3) Whether the immigration officer's decision violates the applicant's rights under ss. 7 and 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
to be free from cruel and unusual punishment.
Analysis:
(1)
Unreasonable And/Or
Fettered Decision
[6]
The applicant submits that the immigration officer's determination that her return to Sri Lanka would not result in unusual or disproportionate hardship is an unreasonable conclusion on the facts. Further, the immigration officer considered in her determination whether the applicant would be at a greater risk in the general population of Sri Lanka and if the applicant would be individually targeted. The applicant submits that the immigration officer applied the wrong criteria and that by limiting her assessment of hardship to the risk of persecution within the meaning of the Convention refugee definition she erred in law by fettering her discretion. The respondent submits that the immigration officer considered the decision of the CRDD, the documentary material submitted with respect to the conditions in Sri Lanka, and many other factors in determining whether sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds existed. The respondent maintains that the decision was a reasonable one and that the immigration officer did not fetter her discretion because she considered a wide variety of factors.
[7]
At issue here is the immigration officer's interpretation and application of immigration manual guidelines regarding the assessment of humanitarian and compassionate grounds, specifically IE-9.07 regarding the consequences of return to country of origin. A number of decisions of this court have upheld these guidelines.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R. 243, Jerome, A.C.J., expressly declined to decide upon the adequacy of the guidelines for humanitarian and compassionate review, but he observed that those guidelines appeared to constitute a permissible statement of general policy.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R. 118; 13 Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (T.D.), Strayer, J., made the following comments:
"I would observe in passing that it must follow as a corollary of the reasoning of Jerome, A.C.J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that an applicant cannot complain if an immigration officer fails or refuses to follow the Minister's guidelines. Nor can he complain if an immigration officer applies any factor in lieu of those in the guidelines as long as this is done in good faith and the factor is not wholly irrelevant to any conceivable view of humanitarian and compassionate considerations. Further, it is for the officer to decide if he is convicted of the truth of an applicant's assertions, unless perhaps he makes findings of fact which are clearly without regard to any material before him. It is not for the court to sit in appeal on his findings of fact or his weighing of the various factors ... I am satisfied that these guidelines adequately convey to immigration officers that, particularly in respect of humanitarian and compassionate considerations, the guidelines are not to be regarded as exhaustive and definitive. It is emphasized and reemphasized that officers are expected to use their best judgment. I believe they amount to 'general policy' or 'rough rules of thumb' which Jerome, A.C.J., recognized as permissible in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case.
I would go farther than Jerome, A.C.J., and say that such guidelines are not only permissible but highly desirable in the circumstances.
" (my underline)
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Strayer, J., directed his attention to the specific guidelines at issue here and found that they were adequately general and that they did not inhibit the Immigration Officer from considering any number of factors contributing to "undue hardship".
[8]
It is the statement in the immigration officer's notes that consideration was given to whether the applicant would face greater risk in the general population and whether she would be individually targeted which is at issue here. In a recent judgment in a similar situation (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  page 2:
"Given the available information on the civil violence in Somalia, distributed by human rights organizations such as Amnesty International, and given the Minister of Employment and Immigration's own statement at the time that of the remaining six million Somalies (sic), '1.5 million are on the verge of starvation and three million are also in desperate need', I can only find that
by requiring the applicant be at greater risk
than anyone else in the Somali population, the respondent's officials fettered their own discretion by imposing a rigid requirement which was inconsistent with the intent of the
Immigration Act
and the ministerial policy." (my underline)
However, in
Muse
, the situation in Somalia, as it related to the risk the applicant in that case would face upon return there, was the key element in the immigration officer's negative determination. In this case, the immigration officer did not give specific reasons in her letter, made no absolute evaluation of whether or not the applicant would face greater persecution if returned to Sri Lanka, and considered many other significant factors affecting her negative determination, including the rejection of the applicant's refugee claim and the denial of his leave application. Nothing in the immigration officer's letter or reasons indicates that any single factor was more important than another and, therefore, the decision was not fettered in any way. As her notes indicate, the immigration officer considered, among other factors, that the applicant was returning to Buffalo, not Sri Lanka, and that she would be provided adequate protection there. On the basis of the evidence before me, the immigration officer's considerations and conclusions appear reasonable.
(2)
Duty Of Fairness - Right To
An Interview Or Hearing
[9]
It is the applicant's submission that the immigration officer failed to comply with the duty of fairness. Specifically, the humanitarian and compassionate review took place through the medium of an exchange of letters without an interview. The respondent submits that the requirements of procedural fairness do not create substantive rights and that there is no obligation under s. 114(2) to conduct an interview or a hearing. The respondent acknowledges that procedural fairness requires a consideration of the entirety of the applicant's case, but that this occurred: the applicant's counsel was given the opportunity to make extensive written submissions.
[10]
In support of the submission that the duty of fairness includes a right to a hearing or an interview within the context of a review of humanitarian and compassionate grounds, the applicant cites three decisions of this court.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Walsh, J., found that
"The only such review, by exchange of letters without any interview, was far too casual and did not represent the full and fair consideration to which the applicant is entitled."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 315 (T.D.), Cullen, J., found that:
"[A] thirty-minute hearing covering all the material filed and hearing representations and explaining the purpose of the hearing and also the Illegal de Facto Resident's public policy, was not doing justice to the applicant, notwithstanding her offer to allow further written submissions that day."
And, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 105 (T.D.), he also found that;
"Much more should have been done than simply a few phone calls and a meeting between the two immigration officers. This was serious matter and the applicant was clearly entitled to a letter and/or an interview outlining the reasons his application was refused and an opportunity to reply to the alleged misrepresentations ... The applicant did not receive natural justice."
[11]
However, the respondent cites three cases in support of the submission that there is no right to an interview or a hearing.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R.(2d) 59 (T.D.), Rouleau, J., found that in the context of the humanitarian and compassionate review stage of the Backlog Clearance Program that
"The determination of whether or not humanitarian and compassionate grounds exist is discretionary and can be made without personal appearance of the person involved. It is a decision that involves no complex legal issues."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 152, I held that while immigration officers are under an obligation to adhere to the rules of procedural fairness, this does not necessarily include the right to an oral hearing. The situation in that case was very similar to this one and I found that provided the applicant was given ample opportunity to set out the humanitarian grounds for her request, there was no necessity for an interview. In that case, as in this case, the applicant's counsel was given the opportunity to make written submissions and it appears in this case that the immigration officer considered these submissions in her notes.
(3)
Charter Arguments
[12]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the analysis of the
Charter
arguments involves a two stage process. First, it is necessary to determine whether the
Charter
is engaged. The second stage involves a determination of whether a breach occurred.
[13]
On the first question, the applicant submits that the removal process which results from a refusal on humanitarian and compassionate grounds engages the application of ss. 7 and 12 of the
Charter
. Specifically, the applicant faces possible removal of Sri Lanka where her life is in danger. This constitutes a threat to security of the person and as such engages the application of ss. 7 and 12. Further, the applicant submits that the protection provided in s. 7 does not relate only to her, but to her family as well.
[14]
I am in agreement with the applicant's submission that the Supreme Court has recognized in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 422; 14 C.R.R. 13; 12 Admin. L.R. 137, that s. 7 is engaged where a person claims Canada's protection as a Convention refugee. I am also in agreement with the submission that where a person faces removal to a country where there might be a threat to the security of that person s. 7 is engaged such that the principles of fundamental justice must be adhered to. However, I do not agree that the protection of s. 7 afforded to the applicant because she is the subject of a removal order is extended to the protection of the "family interests" or the "family unit", including protection of her child. Her child benefits in his own right from the protection of the
Charter
as a Canadian citizen. He is not subject to a removal order and is not a party to this application. The issue of whether or not his
Charter
rights have been infringed is not an issue before me.
[15]
Regarding the second question about whether the applicant's rights under ss. 7 and 12 have been infringed, the applicant submits that the decision regarding her application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration violated the principles of fundamental justice on the basis of the above arguments regarding an unreasonable/fettered decision and the duty of fairness. Further, a breach of fundamental justice occurred through the failure of the immigration officer to obtain assurances that the applicant would not be removed to the United States to Sri Lanka. The applicant submits that the immigration officer erred in taking into consideration that the applicant would be able to make a refugee claim in the United States, that this is an irrelevant consideration. The immigration officer also erred by not giving the applicant the opportunity to respond to this consideration. Finally, the decision to remove her constitutes cruel and unusual treatment of both her and her child pursuant to s. 12.
[16]
My reasoning above regarding the issues of an unreasonable or fettered decision and procedural unfairness apply within the context of a potential breach of fundamental justice. I do not believe that the immigration officer's consideration of the fact that the applicant faced removal to the United States or the failure to obtain assurance that she would not be deported to Sri Lanka constitute a breach of fundamental justice. As I stated above, the immigration officer's humanitarian and review of the applicant's situation considered many relevant factors and she was provided ample opportunity to respond.
[17]
Regarding the alleged infringement of s. 12, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 400, this court found that provided the rules of procedural fairness and natural justice have been adhered to, the deportation of a refugee claimant to their country of origin when they have been determined not to be a refugee cannot be cruel or unusual punishment within s. 12 of the
Charter
. In this instance there is no evidence of unfairness or unreasonableness on the part of the immigration officer.
[18]
In a similar situation involving the deportation of the father of a child born in Canada, Mr. Justice Joyal provided reasons for a denial of leave to appeal which canvassed some of the jurisprudence on the issue of whether removal of a parent constituted cruel and unusual punishment because the child would have to follow (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). He referred to a Court of Appeal decision,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), where Hugessen, J.A., states:
"On the one hand, nothing in the record indicates that the life or security of the child will be adversely affected if she goes to live in Poland. On the other hand and still more significantly, the child, whose father, it is still asserted, continues to care for her, will not necessarily be obliged to leave Canada simply because her mother is required to go. The decision to take the child to Poland with the mother or to leave her in Canada with the father will be made by the parents themselves and the consequences of whichever choice is made cannot be laid at the Government's door. In this respect, the case is very close to the decision of this court in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and I can do no better than to quote the words of Le Dain, J.:
'What the appellant complains of, should it occur and however regrettable it might be, will not be the direct and unavoidable result of the application of a law of Canada but rather the result of her mother's decision as to whether to take her with her or to leave her in Canada. Even if the result, in either case, be regarded as virtually an inevitable one because of the difficulty of the decision for the mother, I strongly doubt that it could be said to result in arbitrary exile or cruel and unusual treatment within the meaning of s. 2 of the Canadian Bill of Rights.'" (at pages 501-502).
For these reasons, I do not believe the removal of the applicant constitutes cruel and unusual punishment or treatment of her or her child.
Conclusion:
[19]
For the above reasons the application for judicial review is dismissed. Counsel for the applicant submitted two questions for my consideration as to whether they constitute serious questions of general importance. In my opinion, there has been considerable jurisprudence determinative of the issues raised.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/dlr
[End of document]