  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 In The Matter Of an application to review and set aside, pursuant to subsection 18(1) and section 18.1 of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended; 
 
 
 
 And In The Matter Of a decision of a Review Committee established pursuant to section 16 of the Family Allowance Act, R.S.C. 1985 (2nd Supp.), c. 12 and section 16 of the Family Allowance Regulations 1982 C.R.C., c. 642. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Summary: 
 
 A Review Committee established pursuant to s. 16 of the Family Allowance Act and s. 16 of the Family Allowance Regulations made a decision favourable to Hennelly. The Crown filed its originating notice of motion for judicial review. However, the Crown failed to file its record within 60 days as required by rule 1606(1). The Crown applied for an extension of time. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Limitation of Actions - Topic 7481 
 
 Actions by the Crown - In the Federal Court of Canada - General - A Review Committee established under the Family Allowance Act and Regulations made a decision favourable to Hennelly - The Crown filed an originating notice of motion for judicial review - However, the Crown failed to file its record within 60 days as required by rule 1606(1) of the Federal Court Rules - The Crown applied for an extension of time - The Crown submitted that the delay arose through inadvertence during the transfer of the file between its legal staff - Hennelly refused to give his consent to the extension - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, declined to grant the extension - See paragraph 7. 
 
 
 
 Limitation of Actions - Topic 7601 
 
 Actions against the Crown - In the Federal Court of Canada - General - [See  
 Limitation of Actions - Topic 7481 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Limitation of Actions - Topic 9615 
 
 Enlargement of time period - Application for - Bars - [See  
 Limitation of Actions - Topic 7481 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Practice - Topic 5223 
 
 Trials - General - Venue or place of trial - Setting venue (Federal Court) - The Crown applied for judicial review of a decision of the Family Allowance Review Committee but failed to file its record within 60 days - The Crown applied for an extension of time - Hennelly refused to consent - Hennelly requested that any future hearings be held in Kitchener - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, observed that the Federal Court had registry offices in certain populous centres across Canada - The court stated that "[i]f one resides outside of those populous centres, one must avail oneself of the services of the nearest registry office, but upon actively sought permission of the Associate Chief Justice, adjudication hearings  
 may 
  (not must) be held in any place where there are available basic court facilities" - See paragraph 8. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Federal Court Rules, rule 1606(1), rule 1614, rule 1619(1) [para. 1]. 
 
 
 
 Authors and Works Noticed: 
 
 Sgayias, Kinnear, Rennie and Saunders, Federal Court Practice (1995), pp. 744, 745 [para. 6]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Christopher Parke, for the applicant; 
 
 Philip Hennelly, on his own behalf. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 George Thomson, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant. 
 
 
 
 This motion was dealt with in writing without the appearance of parties, before Muldoon, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on March 1, 1995. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Muldoon, J. 
 : The Attorney General of Canada, pursuant to rule 324, moves the court for an order extending the time for the Attorney General to file and serve the necessary application record herein. The Attorney General, (hereinafter sometimes the applicant), filed his originating notice of motion for judicial review on October 5, 1994. The applicant's record, according to rule 1606(1), was to have been filed within 60 days, or by or on Monday, December 5, 1994. This present motion, specifically for an extension of time, brought erroneously pursuant to rule 1619(1), whereas rule 1614 is the specifically apt rule, was brought on February 10, 1995. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  In the applicant's notice of motion the grounds stated are:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (a) Despite an intention to proceed, inadvertence on behalf of the applicant has resulted in a failure to file the application record within the prescribed time;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (b) Rule 1619(1) of the  
 Federal Court Rules 
 ;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (c) Such other grounds as this Court may admit.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> The affidavit of Parlet Bryan will be presented in evidence. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [3] 
  The affidavit in support of this motion is brief. It states, in essence:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1. I [the affiant] am a secretary to [a lawyer] of the Department of Justice who has carriage of this matter and from my review of the file I may state as follows.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 2. This file was transferred to [the mentioned lawyer] from another lawyer some time ago and through inadvertence it did not come to his attention until the time for the filing of the application record had passed. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  "Inadvertence" is the reason asserted for missing the limitation period stated in rule 1606(1). 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  One can certainly sympathize with the applicant's plight. Busy lawyers sometimes  
 do 
  forget to meet time limitations (perhaps even more often than the public realize). Any judge of this court knows how often, when the shoe is on the other foot, the Attorney General graciously and generously consents to a like motion made by a member of the public or other individual. No one relishes the impalement of an earnest party to proceedings on the sharp point of a time limit, even although proceedings such as this one are meant to be summary and expeditious. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  Here, it appears that the respondent is not represented by solicitors or counsel. He responded personally in a letter dated February 15, 1995, as follows:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Please be advised of the following: 
 
 
 
 (1) I request the court  
 not 
  to waive compliance under 1619(1) or any other grounds this Court may admit. 
 
 
 
 (2) If due to inadvertence by the applicant the application record was not filed within the prescribed time so be it.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> If I have to attend any future court dates could you please have them transferred to a Court in Kitchener. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  It is clear that this unrepresented respondent does not consent to the applicant's motion which, if granted, would operate procedurally against the respondent's interest. The court cannot compel the respondent to be gracious and generous in this circumstance as the Attorney General so often is. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Thus, the disposition of this motion leads to the existing jurisprudence which demonstrates how the court ought judicially to exercise its discretion in such a circumstance. For ease of reference that jurisprudence is collected and summarized on pp. 744-745 of the 1995 edition of  
 Federal Court Practice 
 , by Sgayias, Kinnear, Rennie and Saunders (Carswell, Toronto). 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  On the basis of that jurisprudence this motion, unfortunately for the applicant, is to be dismissed, because even candidly admitted inadvertence will not suffice in the absence of the respondent's forgiving consent. Here no one concerned was in a coma or otherwise incapacitated, and while inadvertence is a more than sufficient ground for sympathy for every day of the inadvertent delay, it is not a sufficient ground in law and in the jurisprudence. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  As to the respondent's request to transfer the proceedings "to a court in Kitchener" this must be the response. The Federal Court is a national, trans-provincial institution with registry offices established in certain populous centres across Canada and itinerant judges travelling across Canada in order to adjudicate cases instituted in those various registry offices. If one resides outside of those populous centres, one must avail oneself of the services of the nearest registry office, but upon actively sought-for permission of the Associate Chief Justice, adjudication hearings  
 may 
  (not must) be held in any place where there are available basic court facilities. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  All in all, the court holds that the applicant's request for an extension of time is to be dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/sg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



