 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Misenga Bunema and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 774)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Shore, J.
July 26, 2007.
Counsel:
Johanne Doyon, for the applicants;
François Joyal, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Doyon & Associés, Montrral, Quebec, for the applicants;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
INTRODUCTION
[1]
Shore, J.
[Translation]: [9] There is no question that the Board has all the necessary discretion to assess the credibility of the testimony of people who claim refugee status, and may have regard to a multitude of factors in so doing. The Board may base its findings on internal contradictions, inconsistencies and evasive statements, which are the "heartland of the discretion of triers of fact", and other extrinsic factors such as rationality, common sense and judicial notice, but those findings must not be made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  IMM-4668-96, December 12, 1997;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  F.C.A., A-388-92, March 24, 1994.
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL).)
JUDICIAL PROCEEDING
[2]
This is an application for judicial review pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (the Act), from a decision by the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) on January 16, 2007, that the applicants were not "Convention refugees" nor of "persons in need of protection" under sections 96 and 97 of the Act.
FACTS
[3]
On September 3, 2005, the female applicant, Misenga Bunema, 22 years old, was forced into a marriage with Colonel Léon Kasonga. Ms. Bunema alleges that she was beaten and forced to have sexual relations against her will, as well as being assaulted by this man.
[4]
On September 10, 2005, Ms. Bunema fled her husband's residence and took refuge with a friend of one of her uncles who had opposed the marriage to the colonel.
[5]
The female applicant's brother, Bilolo Bunema, alleges that, on September 11, 2005, he was taken to the residence of Colonel Kasonga, where he was interrogated and beaten and then held in a communal prison for two days. The applicants also allege that their paternal uncle was beaten and killed by the colonel's soldiers.
[6]
In November 2005, thanks to the friend of their maternal uncle, the applicants left the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). After transiting through Paris, they allege that they arrived in Canada on November 20, 2005, and made a claim for refugee protection the following day.
IMPUGNED DECISION
[7]
In a decision dated January 16, 2007, the Board dismissed the applicants' claim for refugee protection, as it considered that they "were not credible, and their testimony was not trustworthy regarding essential elements of their claim for refugee protection" (Board's decision, p. 2).
[8]
In its reasons, the Board noted that "significant inconsistencies between the claimants' testimony, their statement made when they applied for refugee protection and their identity documents were immediately apparent to the panel". These problems led the panel to doubt that the applicants had "ended their studies on the date and for the reasons claimed, which from the outset taint[ed] their credibility" (Board's decision, pages 2 and 4).
[9]
The Board also noted "another serious inconsistency", which "further undermines the claimants' credibility". Ms. Bunema did not explain to the Board's satisfaction why she had not fled her home as soon as she was told she would be married to a colonel in the Congolese army, though she had vigorously opposed the marriage (Board's decision, pages 4 and 5).
[10]
The Board considered that Mr. Bunema's credibility was damaged when he was confronted with the statements he made when he sought refugee protection. In this connection, the Board considered that the male applicant's contradictions "on central points, which are without reasonable explanation, irremediably impair the credibility of his story" (Board's decision, pages 5 and 6).
[11]
The Board noted that "Ms. Bunema's testimony contained several serious weaknesses regarding the alleged murder of her paternal uncle . . .". Consequently, the Board did not attach any evidentiary value to the death certificate submitted by the female applicant on this point (Board's decision, pages 6 and 7).
[12]
The Board also noted several inconsistencies which undermined the credibility of the applicants' narrative as to the various actions taken by a Mr. Ilunga, who supposedly helped the applicants to hide and to flee their country (Board's decision, pages 7 to 9).
[13]
The Board concluded that it was "dealing with a story invented to justify a claim for refugee protection" (Board's decision, page 9).
[14]
Additionally, aside from the applicants' lack of credibility, the Board considered that it could not accept the applicants' claim that they had a well-founded fear of persecution or torture as Congolese nationals. The Board considered that this claim was not supported either by the applicants' conduct in delaying to put forward this allegation, or by the evidence of objective conditions in the applicants' country of origin (Board's decision, pages 9 and 10).
ISSUES
[15]
Did the Board make a patently unreasonable error in finding that Misenga Bunema and Bilolo Bunema were not credible?
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[16]
Assessing the credibility of witnesses and weighing evidence is a matter for the Board. The latter has well-established expertise in deciding questions of fact, and in particular in assessing the credibility and the subjective fear of persecution of a refugee protection claimant (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), at paragraph 14).
[17]
In an application for judicial review turning on questions of credibility, the standard of review that must be applied is that of patent unreasonableness. The Court must demonstrate a high degree of deference since it is up to the Board to weigh the applicants' testimony and assess the credibility of their statements. If the Board's findings are reasonable, no intervention is warranted. However, the Board's decision must be based on the evidence: it should not be made arbitrarily or on the basis of erroneous findings of fact without regard for the evidence put forward (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), at paragraph 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), at paragraph 4).
ANALYSIS
Did the Board make a patently unreasonable error in finding that Misenga Bunema and Bilolo Bunema were not credible?
[18]
In its decision, the Board referred to several inconsistencies and contradictions regarding the applicants' studies and occupations. Following a thorough review of the documentary evidence and the transcript of the hearing, the Court considers that the discrepancies identified by the Board are real and relevant contradictions. Further, the Board did not give the applicants' lack of credibility on this point more importance than was necessary. On the contrary, the Board indicated in its reasons that the problems which it had noted affected the applicants' credibility "immediately". The Board then undertook an analysis of the most important points in the applicants' narrative.
(a) Contradictions and improbabilities regarding the applicants' studies and occupations
[19]
It was thus open to the Board to note the following inconsistencies in the applicants' evidence:
(a) In their narrative, the applicants alleged that, following their parent's death, they had to interrupt their studies and earn their living with their own resources. However, it appears that the applicants were able to continue with their studies, including studies abroad (Board's decision, page 3).
(b) In his narrative, Mr. Bunema alleged that he had to interrupt his studies in 1999 after his high school education. However, it appears that he was able to study in Kinshasa and in Zambia from 1999 to 2002.
(c) In his Personal Information Form (PIF), Mr. Bunema did not mention his studies in Zambia from 2001 to 2002, limiting himself to those done in Kinshasa from 1999 to 2001. The Board did not accept the male applicant's explanation that he had "forgotten" to mention this point.
(d) Ms. Bunema stated that she followed her brother to Zambia, but that she did not study there. However, the female applicant obtained a student visa from the Zambian authorities and was identified as a student in her passport at that time. The Board did not believe the female applicant's explanation that she had simply accompanied her brother to Zambia, that her uncle had obtained her travel documents and that she did not know why she was designated as a student in those documents.
(e) Ms. Bunema was also identified as a student in a certificate of loss of identity documents dated November 2002, three years after the alleged end of her studies. The Board did not believe the female applicant's explanation that it was her uncle who had obtained this document for her and that she did not know why she was so designated in the document.
(f) The applicants alleged that they lived together. However, two different addresses were shown under the heading [TRANSLATION] "residence" in their passports. Additionally, neither of the two addresses indicated correspond to those given on their PIFs. The Board did not believe the applicants' explanation that their passports indicated their uncle's mailing address, since they could not explain why he would have indicated two different addresses for his residence.
[20]
In short, the applicants did not establish that the Board's findings on this point were so vitiated as to make its decision patently unreasonable as a whole.
(b) Contradictions and improbabilities regarding the female applicant's forced marriage
[21]
Contrary to what the applicants maintain, it was open to the Board to conclude from all the evidence in the record that the female applicant was not credible when she said that her uncle forced her to marry a colonel in the Congolese army.
[22]
In this regard, in her written narrative, the female applicant said she had [TRANSLATION] "vigorously opposed" her uncle's plan without there being any reason for this opposition. Accordingly, the Board found it surprising that the female applicant did not try to escape this sad fate which she said she feared. It was open to the Board to conclude that the female applicant was not credible regarding the mistreatment by the colonel in the Congolese army.
[23]
It further appeared that the Board took into account the documentary evidence regarding the common practice of forced marriage in the DRC. Contrary to what is argued by the applicants, the evidence did not indicate that all women were resigned to this practice (applicants' record, page A56).
[24]
Accordingly, the Board's decision was not patently unreasonable as a whole.
(c) Contradictions and improbabilities regarding the circumstances surrounding the applicants' flight
[25]
Contrary to the applicants' allegations, it was open to the Board to take into account the applicants' contradictory testimony regarding the circumstances of their flight from the DRC.
[26]
In this regard, in the applicants' written narrative, they stated that a friend of their uncle, Mr. Ilunga, helped them to flee the DRC. However, Mr. Bunema made no mention whatever of the important part played by his uncle's friend, as appears from the point of entry notes. Thus, when the Board asked him how much the trip had cost, the male applicant stated that he did not know since it was his uncle who had [TRANSLATION] "prepared everything". In reply to another question, the male applicant then mentioned that his uncle was called Mr. Bapuka. Accordingly, the Board could not reasonably accept the male applicant's explanation when he said that in his first reply he intended to refer to Mr. Ilunga (Board's decision, page 5).
[27]
The Board further noted that the male applicant stated at the point of entry that his uncle was the only person who could help them to hide. In his written narrative, however, it was actually Mr. Ilunga who gave the applicant this assistance. The Board could not accept the male applicant's explanation that he had mentioned Mr. Ilunga's name to the immigration officer, but the latter failed to mention it in his notes (Board's decision, page 6).
[28]
It was also open to the Board to doubt the male applicant's narrative regarding the statement that Mr. Bakupa had nevertheless played a part in their experience by financing their trip, and that Mr. Ilunga did not mention Mr. Bakupa's name so as to protect him from the DRC authorities. This explanation is contradicted by a letter from Mr. Ilunga in which he said he personally paid the cost of the applicants' trip abroad (applicants' record, page A84).
[29]
In view of the foregoing, it was not unreasonable for the Board to find that the applicants' testimony was not credible regarding the circumstances of their flight from the DRC.
(c) Contradictions and improbabilities regarding the alleged murder of the applicants' uncle
[30]
Contrary to the applicants' allegations, it was open to the Board not to believe that their uncle was murdered following the female applicant's flight. Thus, in their initial written narrative, the applicants stated that the soldiers beat their uncle to death in front of his wife and looted his house. The female applicant also said, in reply to questions from the immigration officer, that her uncle had been beaten [TRANSLATION] "and killed at the scene".
[31]
However, the death certificate obtained by the applicants after their written narrative was filed indicates that the applicants' uncle died not on September 11, 2005, but on September 12, 2005, the day after this alleged assault.
[32]
Accordingly, the Board did not feel that the applicants were credible when they filed a [TRANSLATION] "correction" to their written narrative, indicating that their uncle had died not on September 11, 2005, but the following day (Board's decision, page 6).
[33]
It was certainly not unreasonable for the Board to believe that the applicants had clearly tried to adjust their narrative, and so had not provided credible testimony regarding the alleged murder of their uncle. On this point, as it did not believe that the male applicant's uncle was [TRANSLATION] "murdered", the Board could conclude that the death certificate did not assist the applicants. Additionally, the fact that their uncle's name was incorrectly retranscribed on the death certificate was another reason for not attaching any evidentiary value to the document. The Board's decision was thus not patently unreasonable on this point.
CONCLUSION
[34]
For all these reasons, the application for judicial review at bar is dismissed.
JUDGMENT
[35]
THE COURT ORDERS
1. The application for judicial review be dismissed;
2. No serious question of general importance be certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [9] Il ne fait aucun doute que la commission du statut de réfugié a toute la discrétion nécessaire pour évaluer la crédibilité du témoignage des personnes qui revendiquent le statut de réfugié et qu'elle peut tenir compte d'une multitude de facteurs pour ce faire. La Commission peut fonder ses conclusion sur des contractions internes, des incohérences et des déclarations évasives qui sont le "fondement même du pouvoir discrétionnaire du juge des faits", ainsi que sur d'autres éléments extrinsèques tels que la raison, le sens commun et la connaissance d'office, mais ces conclusions ne doivent pas être tirées de façon abusive ou arbitraire ou sans tenir compte des éléments de preuve dont dispose la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (IMM_4668-96, 12 décembre 1997),
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.F.) (A-399-92, 24 mars 1994).
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL).)
PROCÉDURE JUDICIAIRE
[2]
Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire introduite en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, L.C. 2001, c. 27 (
Loi
), à l'encontre d'une décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiées de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (Commission), rendue le 16 janvier 2007, statuant que les demandeurs n'ont pas la qualité de "réfugiés au sens de la Convention" ni de "personnes à protéger" en vertu des articles 96 et 97 de la
Loi
.
FAITS
[3]
Le 3 septembre 2005, la demanderesse, Mme Misenga Bunema, âgée de 22 ans, est soumise à un mariage forcé avec le colonel Léon Kasonga. Madame Bunema allègue avoir été battue et contrainte à des relations sexuelles contre son gré, en plus d'être violentée par cet homme.
[4]
Le 10 septembre 2005, Mme Bunema fuit le domicile de son époux et se refuge chez l'ami d'un de ses oncles qui s'était opposé au mariage avec le colonel.
[5]
Le 11 septembre 2005, le frère de la demanderesse, M. Bilolo Bunema, allègue qu'il a été amené chez le colonel Kasonga où il fut interrogé et battu puis détenu dans une prison communale pendant deux jours. Aussi, les demandeurs allèguent que leur oncle paternel fut battu et tué par les militaires du colonel.
[6]
En novembre 2005, grâce à l'ami de leur oncle maternel, les demandeurs quitte la République démocratique du Congo (RDC). Après avoir transité par Paris, ils allèguent être arrivés au Canada le 20 novembre 2005 et réclamer le statut de réfugié le lendemain.
DÉCISION CONTESTÉE
[7]
Dans une décision datée du 16 janvier 2007, la Commission rejette la demande d'asile des demandeurs, estimant qu'ils "n'étaient pas crédible et [que] leur témoignage n'était pas digne de foi en égard des éléments essentiels de leur demande d'asile". (Décision de la Commission, à la page 2.)
[8]
Dans ses motifs, la Commission a noté que "D'entrée de jeu, des incohérences significatives sont apparues au tribunal entre le témoignage des demandeurs, leur déclaration faite lorsqu'ils ont sollicité l'asile et leurs documents d'identité". Ces problèmes ont amené le tribunal à douter que les demandeurs avaient "cessé leurs études à la date et pour les raisons alléguées, ce qui, dès le départ, entach[ait] leur crédibilité". (Décision de la Commission, aux pages 2 et 4)
[9]
La Commission a également relevé une "autre incohérence importante" qui est "venue miner davantage la crédibilité des demandeurs". Madame Bunema n'a pas valablement expliqué à la satisfaction de la Commission pourquoi elle n'a pas fui son domicile dès qu'on lui eut annoncé qu'elle allait être mariée à un colonel de l'armée congolaise, elle qui pourtant s'était vivement opposé à ce mariage. (Décision de la Commission, aux pages 4 et 5.)
[10]
La Commission a estimé que la crédibilité de M. Bunema a été mise à mal lorsqu'il a été confronté à ses déclarations faites lorsqu'il a sollicité l'asile. A cet égard, la Commission a estimé que les contradictions du demandeur "sur des éléments centraux sans explications raisonnables affectaient] irrémédiablement la crédibilité de cette histoire". (Décision de la Commission aux pages 5 et 6.)
[11]
La Commission a noté que "Le témoignage de la demandeure [sic] comportait plusieurs failles importantes lorsqu'il fut question du prétendu assassinat de son oncle paternel [...]". Par conséquent, la Commission n'a pas accordé de valeur probante au certificat des décès soumis par la demanderesse sur ce point. (Décision de la Commission, aux pages 6 et 7.)
[12]
La Commission a aussi relevé plusieurs incohérences qui sont venues miner la crédibilité du récit des demandeurs, en ce qui a trait aux différentes démarches entreprises par un certain M. Ilunga, qui aurait supposément aidé les demandeurs à se cacher et fuir leurs pays. (Décision de la Commission, aux pages 7 à 9.)
[13]
La Commission a conclu qu'il était "en présence d'une histoire inventée afin de justifier une demande d'asile." (Décision de la Commission, à la page 9.)
[14]
Par ailleurs, au-delà du manque de crédibilité des demandeurs, la Commission a estimé qu'elle ne pouvait pas accepter la prétention des demandeurs, selon laquelle ils avaient une crainte bien fondée de persécution ou de torture en tant que ressortissants congolais. La Commission a estimé que cette prétention n'était pas appuyée, ni par le comportement des demandeurs, qui avaient tardé à invoquer cette allégation, ni par la preuve sur les conditions objectives dans le pays d'origine des demandeurs. (Décision de la Commission, aux pages 9 et 10.)
QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[15]
La Commission a-t-elle commise une erreur manifestement déraisonnable en décidant que Mme Misenger Bunema et M. Bilolo Bunema ne sont pas crédibles?
NORME DE CONTROLE
[16]
L'évaluation de la crédibilité des témoins et de l'appréciation de la preuve relève de la compétence de la Commission. Ce dernier a une expertise bien établie pour trancher des questions de fait et, plus particulièrement, pour évaluer la crédibilité et la crainte subjective de persécution d'un demandeur d'asile. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), au paragraphe 14.)
[17]
Dans le cadre d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire portant sur des questions de crédibilité, la norme de contrôle qu'il convient d'appliquer est celle de la décision manifestement déraisonnable. La Cour doit faire preuve d'une grande retenue puisqu'il appartient à la Commission d'apprécier le témoignage des demandeurs et d'évaluer la crédibilité de leurs affirmations. Si les conclusions de la Commission sont raisonnables, il n'y a pas lieu d'intervenir. Toutefois, la décision de la Commission doit s'appuyer sur la preuve; elle ne doit pas être prise arbitrairement en se fondant sur des conclusions de faits erronées ou en ignorant des éléments de preuve présentés. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), au paragraphe 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), au paragraphe 4.)
ANALYSE
La Commission a-t-elle commise une erreur manifestement déraisonnable en décidant que Mme Misenga Bunema et M. Bilolo Bunema n'étaient pas crédibles?
[18]
Dans sa décision, la Commission a renvoyé à plusieurs incohérences et contradictions en ce qui concerne les études et occupations des demandeurs. À la suite d'un examen approfondi de la preuve documentaire et du procès verbal de l'audience, la Cour estime que les divergences identifiées par la Commission sont des contradictions réelles et pertinentes. En outre, la Commission n'a pas donné, au manque de crédibilité des demandeurs sur ce point, plus d'importance que nécessaire. Au contraire, la Commission a indiqué dans ses motifs que les problèmes qu'elle a relevés affectaient "dès le départ" la crédibilité des demandeurs. Ensuite, la Commission a procédé à une analyse des éléments plus importants du récit des demandeurs.
a) Contradictions et invraisemblances concernant les études et occupations des demandeurs
[19]
Ainsi, il était loisible à la Commission de relever les incohérences suivantes émanant de la preuve des demandeurs:
a) Dans leur récit, les demandeurs allèguent que, suite au décès de leur parent, ils ont dû interrompre leurs études et gagner leur vie par leurs propres moyens. Or, il appert que les demandeurs ont pu poursuivre leurs études, entre autres à l'étranger. (Décision de la Commission, à la page 3.)
b) M. Bunema allègue, dans son récit, avoir dû interrompre ses études en 1999 après son secondaire. Or, il appert qu'il a fait des études à Kinshasa et en Zambie de 1999 à 2002;
c) Dans son Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP), M. Bunema n'a pas mentionné ses études en Zambie de 2002 à 2002, se limitant à celles suivies à Kinshasa de 1999 à 2001. La Commission n'a pas accepté l'explication du demandeur, qui affirme avoir "oublié" de mentionner cet élément;
d) Mme Bunema a affirmé avoir suivi son frère en Zambie, mais affirme ne pas y avoir étudié. Or, la demanderesse a obtenu un visa d'étudiante des autorités de la Zambie et a été identifiée comme étudiante dans son passeport à cette époque. La Commission n'a pas cru l'explication de la demanderesse qui a affirmé qu'elle a simplement accompagné son frère en Zambie, que son oncle a obtenu ses documents de voyage et qu'elle ignorait la raison pour laquelle elle était désignée comme étudiante dans ces documents;
e) Mme Bunema est également identifiée comme étudiante dans une attestation de pertes de documents datés de novembre 2002, soit trois ans après la fin alléguée de ses études. La Commission n'a pas cru l'explication de la demanderesse qui affirme que c'est son oncle qui a obtenu ce document pour elle et qu'elle ignorait la raison pour laquelle il l'a désigné ainsi dans ce document;
f) Les demandeurs affirment avoir habité ensemble. Or, il est inscrit deux adresses différentes sous la rubrique "domicile" dans leurs passeports. En outre, aucunes des deux adresses indiquées ne correspondent à celles inscrites dans leurs FRPs. La Commission n'a pas cru l'explication des demandeurs, selon laquelle leurs passeports indiquent l'adresse postale de leur oncle puisqu'ils ne peuvent expliquer la raison pour laquelle ce dernier aurait noté deux adresses différentes pour son domicile.
[20]
En somme, les demandeurs n'ont pas démontré que les constations de la Commission sur ce point son viciées au point de rendre sa décision manifestement déraisonnable dans son ensemble.
b) Contradictions et invraisemblances concernant le mariage forcé de la demanderesse
[21]
Contrairement à ce que les demandeurs affirment, il était loisible à la Commission, à la lumière de toute la preuve au dossier, de conclure que la demanderesse n'était pas crédible lorsqu'elle a affirmé que son oncle l'a forcé à épouser un colonel de l'armée congolaise.
[22]
À ce titre, dans son récit écrit, la demanderesse affirme être "vivement opposée" au projet de son oncle sans qu'il n'y ait une raison derrière cette opposition. Ainsi, la Commission pouvait se surprendre que la demanderesse n'ait pas tenté d'échapper à ce triste sort qu'elle disait redouter. Par ailleurs, il était loisible à la Commission de ne pas juger crédible la demanderesse en ce qui concerne le mauvais traitement de la part du colonel de l'armée congolaise.
[23]
En outre, il appert que la Commission a tenu compte de la preuve documentaire en ce qui a trait à la pratique commune du mariage forcé en RDC. Contrairement aux prétentions des demandeurs, la preuve n'indique pas que ce sont toutes les femmes qui se résignent à cette pratique. (Dossier des demandeurs, à la page A56).
[24]
Ainsi, la décision de la Commission n'était pas manifestement déraisonnable dans son ensemble.
c) Contradictions et invraisemblances en ce qui a trait aux circonstances de la fuite des demandeurs
[25]
Contrairement aux allégations des demandeurs, il était loisible à la Commission de tenir compte du témoignage contradictoire des demandeurs en ce qui a trait aux circonstances de leur fuite de la RDC.
[26]
A ce titre, dans le récit écrit des demandeurs, ces derniers ont affirmé qu'un ami de leur oncle, M. Ilunga, les avait aidés à fuir la RDC. Cependant, M. Bunema n'a aucunement fait mention du rôle important joué par l'ami de son oncle tel qu'il appert des notes au point d'entrée. Ainsi, lorsque la Commission lui a demandé combien avait coûté le voyage, le demandeur a affirmé qu'il l'ignorait, puisque c'est son oncle qui avait "tout préparé". Or, en réponse à une autre question, le demandeur a alors mentionné que son oncle s'appelait M. Bapuka. La Commission ne pouvait donc pas raisonnablement retenir l'explication du demandeur, qui affirmait avoir voulu, dans sa première réponse, référer M. Ilunga. (Décision de la Commission, à la page 5.)
[27]
La Commission a également noté que le demandeur a affirmé au point d'entrée que son oncle était la seule personne qui a pu les aider à se cacher. Or, dans son récit écrit, c'est plutôt M. Ilunga qui a fourni cette assistance au demandeur. La Commission n'a pas pu retenir l'explication du demandeur qui affirma avoir mentionné le nom de M. Ilunga à l'agent d'immigration, mais que celui-ci avait omis de le mentionner dans ses notes. (Décision de la Commission, à la page 6.)
[28]
Par ailleurs, il était loisible à la Commission de douter de l'histoire du demandeur en ce qui a trait à l'affirmation que M. Bakupa avait tout de même joué un rôle dans leur histoire, en finançant leur voyage et que M. Ilunga n'a pas mentionné le nom de M. Bakupa afin de le protéger des autorités du RDC. Cette explication est contredite par une lettre de M. Ilunga dans laquelle il affirme avoir supporté à ses propres frais le voyage des demandeurs à l'étranger. (Dossier du demandeur, à la page A84).
[29]
Compte tenu de ce qui précède, il n'était pas déraisonnable pour la Commission de conclure que le témoignage des demandeurs n'était pas crédible en ce qui a trait aux circonstances de leur fuite de la RDC.
c) Contradictions et invraisemblances en ce qui a trait au prétendu assassinat de l'oncle des demandeurs
[30]
Contrairement aux allégations des demandeurs, il était loisible à la Commission de ne pas croire que leur oncle a été assassiné suite à la fuite de la demanderesse. Ainsi, dans leur récit écrit initial, les demandeurs affirment que les militaires ont battu leur oncle à mort devant sa femme et pillé sa maison. En outre, la demanderesse a également affirmé, en réponse aux questions de l'agent d'immigration, que son oncle a été battu "et tué sur place".
[31]
Par ailleurs, le certificat de décès, obtenu par les demandeurs suite au dépôt de leur récit écrit, indique que l'oncle des demandeurs est décédé non pas le 11 septembre 2005, mais le 12 septembre 2005, soit le lendemain de cette prétendue agression.
[32]
Ainsi, la Commission n'a pas jugé que les demandeurs fussent crédibles lorsqu'ils ont déposé une "correction" à leur récit écrit, indiquant que leur oncle était mort, non plus le 11 septembre 2005, mais le lendemain. (Décision de la Commission, à la page 6.)
[33]
Il n'était certes pas déraisonnable pour la Commission de croire que les demandeurs avaient manifestement tenté d'ajuster leur récit et que, dès lors, ils n'ont pas offert un témoignage crédible concernant le prétendu assassinat de leur oncle. Sur ce point, n'ayant pas cru que l'oncle du demandeur fut "assassiné", la Commission pouvait conclure que le certificat de décès n'était d'aucun secours pour les demandeurs. Du reste, le fait que le nom de leur oncle a été retranscrit erronément sur le certificat de décès constitue un autre motif de ne pas accorder de valeur probante à ce document. Ainsi, la décision de la Commission n'est pas manifestement déraisonnable sur ce point.
CONCLUSION
[34]
Pour tous ces motifs, la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
JUGEMENT
[35] LA COUR ORDONNE
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire soit rejetée;
2. Aucune question grave de portée générale soit certifiée.
[End of document]