 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gulri, Re (1993), 65 F.T.R. 7 (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 In The Matter Of the Citizenship Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29; 
 
 
 
 And In The Matter Of an Appeal from the decision of a Citizenship Judge; 
 
 
 
 And In The Matter Of Harpreet Singh Gulri 
 
 (T-2552-92) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Gulri, Re 
 
 
 
 Federal Court of Canada 
 
 Trial Division 
 
 Strayer, J. 
 
 June 24, 1993. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 A landed immigrant applied for citizenship while subject to an outstanding charge of assault. The citizenship judge dismissed the application, applying s. 22(1)(b) of the Citizenship Act, which provided that no one could be granted citizenship while charges for an "indictable offence" were pending. The immigrant appealed. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, allowed the appeal and granted the citizenship application. Evidence established the assault charge was proceeded with by way of summary conviction and had been withdrawn or dismissed by the immigrant's entering a recognizance. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2547 
 
 Naturalization - Disqualifications - Pend­ing charge for indictable offence - A landed immigrant applied for citizenship while subject to an outstanding charge of assault - The citizenship judge dismissed the application, applying s. 22(1)(b) of the Citizenship Act, which provided that no one could be granted citizenship while charges for an "indictable offence" were pending - The immigrant appealed - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the appeal and granted the citi­zenship application - Evidence established the assault charge was proceeded with by way of summary conviction and had been withdrawn or dismissed by the immigrant's entering a recognizance, therefore, the citizenship judge erred in applying s. 22(1)(b). 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Citizenship Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29, sect. 14(1), sect. 14(5) [para. 6]; sect. 22(1)(b) [para. 3]. 
 
 Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, sect. 266 [para. 2]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Peter K. Large, amicus curiae; 
 
 Harpreet Singh Gulri, on his own behalf. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Peter K. Large, Toronto, Ont., amicus curiae. 
 
 
 
 This appeal was heard on June 23, 1993, at Toronto, Ontario, before Strayer, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on June 24, 1993. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Strayer, J. 
 : These are reasons for a judgment signed on June 23, 1993. The appellant Gulri was granted landed immigrant status on March 23, 1988. He applied for citizenship on May 6, 1991. On November 3, 1991 he was charged with assault and that charge was still outstanding when his application was heard by the Citizenship Court on February 26, 1992. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  In a decision dated July 27, 1992, the citizenship judge dismissed the application. Although she found Mr. Gulri had met all other requirements, she decided he could not be granted citizenship because, by s. 22(1)(b) no one can be granted citizenship while charges are pending against him for "an indictable offence". 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  I could find nothing in the file as to the evidence before the judge which led her to believe that Mr. Gulri was charged with an "indictable offence". A charge of assault under s. 266 of the  
 Criminal Code 
  can be proceeded with either as an indictable offence or as a summary conviction offence. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  When Mr. Gulri appeared before me on June 17, 1993, he stated that the charge had been withdrawn on December 11, 1992, when he entered into a recognizance to keep the peace. He had no documentation to confirm this. I adjourned the hearing until June 23 in order that he could obtain documents showing the nature of the original charge and of its disposition. The document he produced on the adjourned date satisfied me that the assault charge was being proceeded with as a summary conviction matter and that indeed it had been either withdrawn or dismissed when he entered into the recognizance to keep the peace on December 11, 1992. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  I therefore allowed the appeal on the grounds that the citizenship judge erred in applying s. 22(1)(b) to Mr. Gulri as in fact he had not been charged with an indictable offence. There being no contest as to the correctness of the judge's other findings, I granted the application for citizenship. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  This case does, however, raise an important question as to how such matters should be dealt with when an applicant is under a temporary ban from obtaining citizenship pursuant to s. 22. If the application is brought on before the Citizenship Court at that time, it is obvious that court must refuse the application. By s. 14(1) the citizenship court must make a decision within 60 days of the application being referred to it. But if that court dismisses the application and its decision is appealed to the Federal Court, and even if that appeal is heard at a time when the disqualification no longer applies, it is arguable that this court should nevertheless dismiss the appeal. By s. 14(5) our role is to hear an appeal from the decision of the citizenship judge, and that decision was correct when rendered if the applicant was at that time under a disqualification. I need not and do not decide what the proper approach of this court should be in such circumstances. But to avoid this dilemma, it seems to me that when the disqualification is known to exist such applications should not be referred to citizenship judges until the statutory period of disqualification has expired. If they are referred, and the citizenship judge of necessity dismisses the application, the unsuccessful applicant should be strongly advised to submit a new application rather than spending time in pursuing what may be a potentially futile appeal to this court. 
 
 
 
 Order accordingly. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



