 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2007] F.T.R. TBEd. OC.018 
 
 
 
 Kenneth Adam Gates, John James St. Jean, Richard Arliss Fox, Neil Robert Simpson and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Correctional Service Canada (CSC) had a statutory duty to provide inmates with a safe and healthy living environment. A prison's Temporary Detention Unit (TDU) did not enforce an indoor smoking ban and left outside doors open for ventilation, as there were no fans. Inmates complained that the TDU was unreasonably cold and that they were denied the right to wear outdoor clothing indoors to keep warm and denied extra blankets. Inmates sought judicial review, seeking a declaration and a mandatory injunction, submitting that CSC breached its duty under the Corrections and Conditional Release Act and its Regulations, which violated their s. 7 and s. 12 Charter rights and the Canadian Human Rights Act. CSC submitted that the court lacked jurisdiction because the inmates failed to use the internal complaints process. The inmates obtained an interlocutory injunction requiring that the TDU temperature be at least 20 degrees centigrade from 8:00 a.m to 12:00 p.m. and no lower than 16 degrees centigrade at any other time. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court granted a declaration that CSC had failed to maintain a safe and healthy living environment and a mandatory injunction continuing the temperature requirements found in the interlocutory injunction. The court held that this was a proper case to depart from the requirement that inmates first use the internal complaint process. 
 
 
 
 Administrative Law - Topic 3302 
 
 Judicial review - General - Bars - Alternate remedy - Inmates sought judicial review without first using the internal complaints process - The Federal Court stated that "the court should not lightly interfere with the complaints process. There are strong policy and statutory reasons for requiring inmates to use this process. It is in cases of compelling circumstances, such as where there is actual physical or mental harm or clear inadequacy of the process that a departure from the complaints process would be justified ..." - The court noted that s. 81 of the Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations specifically contemplated inmates seeking alternative legal remedies, which was consistent with the regulatory scheme where there were urgent substantive matters and evident inadequacy in the internal procedures - Where the internal complaint process was neither timely nor effective, it was not adequate and inmates had to resort to the courts for a legal remedy - See paragraphs 20 to 36. 
 
 
 
 Administrative Law - Topic 3302 
 
 Judicial review - General - Bars - Alternate remedy - [See  
 Prisons - Topic 1103.2 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Prisons - Topic 1103.2 
 
 Administration - Prisoners' rights - Safe and healthy living environment - Correctional Service Canada (CSC) had a statutory duty to provide inmates with a safe and healthy living environment - A prison's Temporary Detention Unit (TDU) did not enforce an indoor smoking ban and left outside doors open for ventilation, as there were no fans - Inmates complained that the TDU was unreasonably cold and that they were denied the right to wear outdoor clothing indoors to keep warm and denied extra blankets - Inmates sought judicial review, seeking a declaration and a mandatory injunction, submitting that CSC breached its duty under the Corrections and Conditional Release Act and its Regulations - CSC submitted that the court lacked jurisdiction because the inmates failed to use the internal complaints process - The inmates obtained an interlocutory injunction requiring that the TDU temperature be at least 20 degrees centigrade from 8:00 a.m to 12:00 p.m. and no lower than 16 degrees centigrade at any other time - The Federal Court granted a declaration that CSC had failed to maintain a safe and healthy living environment and a mandatory injunction continuing the temperature requirements found in the interlocutory injunction - The court held that this was a proper case to depart from the requirement that inmates first use the internal complaint process. 
 
 
 
 Prisons - Topic 1131 
 
 Administration - Prisoners' rights - Judicial review or grievance - [See first  
 Administrative Law - Topic 3302 
 ]. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 82, refd to. [para. 3]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), refd to. [para. 25]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 362 W.A.C. 1, refd to. [para. 27]. 
 
 Reference Re Remuneration of Judges of the Provincial Court (P.E.I.), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 3; 217 N.R. 1; 206 A.R. 1; 156 W.A.C. 1; 121 Man.R.(2d) 1; 158 W.A.C. 1; 156 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 1; 483 A.P.R. 1, refd to. [para. 39]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Corrections and Conditional Release Act, S.C. 1992, c. 20, sect. 70 [para. 12]. 
 
 Corrections and Conditional Release Act Regulations (Can.), Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations, SOR/92-620, sect. 74, sect. 77, sect. 78, sect. 79, sect. 80 [Appendix A]; sect. 81 [para. 15, Appendix A]; sect. 82 [Appendix A]; sect. 83 [para. 14]. 
 
 Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations - see Corrections and Conditional Release Act Regulations (Can.). 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Jennifer Metcalfe, for the applicants; 
 
 Susanne Periera, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Prisoners' Legal Services, Abbotsford, B.C., for the applicants; 
 
 John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Vancouver, B.C., for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on October 4, 2007, at Vancouver, B.C., before Phelan, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment on October 16, 2007. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Phelan, J. 
 : Justice Blanchard had issued an interlocutory injunction prohibiting Correctional Service Canada (CSC) from allowing the temperature at the Temporary Detention Unit (TDU) at Matsqui Institution to drop below 20 degrees Celsius between the hours of 08:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and 16 degrees Celsius between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 08:00 a.m. pending the final disposition of this application for judicial review. This is the judicial review which underlies Justice Blanchard's decision in which he found the serious issue to be whether the Applicants were required to use the internal complaint procedure before applying to this Court for relief. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The TDU is a holding area in the Matsqui Institution which holds parolees who have been returned to custody as a result of parole violations. Typically, inmates in the TDU spend a short period of time in the unit ranging from a few days to a few weeks. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The Applicants, with the exception of St. Jean, have been relocated to other facilities and none are in the TDU. The Applicants attempted to suggest that some of them might be transferred back to the TDU - an entirely speculative assertion. The purpose of the argument is to suggest that the issue in this case is not academic. Given the nature of TDU inmate holdings, the principles in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 82, would apply and the Respondent quite properly does not seek to strike this judicial review on the grounds of mootness. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The problem related to the TDU is systemic and could possibly apply to a number of current and potential inmates. The problem is that because inmates smoke in their cells, contrary to an unenforced policy of CSC, the unit has to be ventilated to clear the smoke. Apparently, there are no fans to accomplish this task. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  In order to ventilate the TDU, the doors of the unit have to be opened. This, the Applicants say, is done with such persistence and regularity that the unit becomes unhealthily cold. As well, the inmates are denied extra blankets or clothing to keep them warm during these periods - particularly in winter - when the TDU becomes very cold. It is alleged that the rear doors of the unit are kept open all day and sometimes all night - the suggestion is that this is done for purposes of causing more discomfort than is necessary to rid the TDU of smoke. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  A number of the Applicants suffer from illnesses (i.e. HIV/AIDS or Hepatitis C) which makes them particularly sensitive to cold and where the cold aggravates their illness. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Applicants submitted evidence from Environment Canada showing that between December 2006 and mid-March 2007 temperatures could range from the low-teens Celsius to as low as -12 degrees, although typically in the range of 0 degrees. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The Applicants submitted their direct evidence which was not directly challenged. This evidence included the allegation that they were denied permission to wear outdoor clothing indoors, that additional clothing/blankets were denied and that oral and written complaints were not acted upon. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Respondent's evidence was from the Acting Correctional Supervisor of the TDU, who addressed the real health need to ventilate the unit of smoke, the difficulty created by inmates smoking indoors (there is no outdoor "no smoking" policy yet) and that extra clothing and blankets were offered to inmates. The affiant's evidence consisted of substantial hearsay evidence without any indication of the source of such evidence, including the absence of any complaints from inmates. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Justice Blanchard issued his order on substantially the same evidence regarding the inmates' complaints as was before this Court, particularly as the evidence relates to the harm experienced by the Applicants and other inmates. Justice Blanchard's order was in effect during the winter of 2007 and there is no evidence that it was not effective or overly burdensome to comply with. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  There was some suggestion put forward by the Respondent's counsel that a new policy imposing a complete smoking ban would be imposed by April 2008 which would eliminate the need to ventilate the TDU. No direct evidence on this point was put forward but I accept counsel's word that such a ban may be forthcoming. The future imposition of this ban only affects the scope of the remedy. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The Respondent's legal obligation to provide a safe and healthy environment for inmates and staff are set forth in ss. 70, 86 and 87 of the  
 Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
 , S.C. 1992, c. 20 ( 
 CCRA 
 ). Section 70 reads: 
 
 
 
 "70. The Service shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that penitentiaries, the penitentiary environment, the living and working conditions of inmates and the working conditions of staff members are safe, healthful and free of practices that undermine a person's sense of personal dignity." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "70. Le Service prend toutes mesures utiles pour que le milieu de vie et de travail des détenus et les conditions de travail des agents soient sains, sécuritaires et exempts de pratiques portant atteinte à la dignité humaine." 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  It is axiomatic that people need heat in winter - a concept not likely to be challenged. The duty to provide a safe and healthy living environment includes providing adequate heat. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The obligation imposed on CSC to provide a healthy environment is set forth particularly in s. 83 of the  
 Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations 
 , S.O.R./92-620 ( 
 Regulations 
 ): 
 
 
 
 "83(1) The Service shall, to ensure a safe and healthful penitentiary environment, ensure that all applicable federal health, safety, sanitation and fire laws are complied with in each penitentiary and that every penitentiary is inspected regularly by the persons responsible for enforcing those laws. 
 
 
 
 "(2) The Service shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the safety of every inmate and that every inmate is 
 
 
 
 (a) adequately clothed and fed; 
 
 
 
 (b) provided with adequate bedding; 
 
 
 
 (c) provided with toilet articles and all other articles necessary for personal health and cleanliness; and 
 
 
 
 (d) given the opportunity to exercise for at least one hour every day outdoors, weather permitting, or indoors where the weather does not permit exercising outdoors." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "83(1) Pour assurer un milieu pénitentiaire sain et sécuritaire, le Service doit veiller à ce que chaque pénitencier soit conforme aux exigences des lois fédérales applicables en matière de santé, de sécurité, d'hygiène et de prévention des incendies et qu'il soit inspecté régulièrement par les responsables de l'application de ces lois. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Le Service doit prendre toutes les mesures utiles pour que la sécurité de chaque détenu soit garantie et que chaque détenu: 
 
 
 
 a) soit habillé et nourri convenablement; 
 
 
 
 b) reçoive une literie convenable; 
 
 
 
 c) reçoive des articles de toilette et tous autres objets nécessaires à la propreté et à l'hygiène personnelles; 
 
 
 
 d) ait la possibilité de faire au moins une heure d'exercice par jour, en plein air si le temps le permet ou, dans le cas contraire, à l'intérieur." 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  When disputes arise between the CSC and an inmate, the  
 Regulations 
  provide for a complaints and grievance process in ss. 74-82 (attached as Annex A to these Reasons). Particularly germane to this judicial review is s. 81 which contemplates an inmate pursuing both the complaints and grievance process as well as other legal remedies. 
 
 
 
 "81(1) Where an offender decides to pursue a legal remedy for the offender's complaint or grievance in addition to the complaint and grievance procedure referred to in these Regulations, the review of the complaint or grievance pursuant to these Regulations shall be deferred until a decision on the alternate remedy is rendered or the offender decides to abandon the alternate remedy. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where the review of a complaint or grievance is deferred pursuant to subsection (1), the person who is reviewing the complaint or grievance shall give the offender written notice of the decision to defer the review." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "81(1) Lorsque le délinquant décide de prendre un recours judiciaire concernant sa plainte ou son grief, en plus de présenter une plainte ou un grief selon la procédure prévue dans le présent règlement, l'examen de la plainte ou du grief conformément au présent règlement est suspendu jusqu'à ce qu'une décision ait été rendue dans le recours judiciaire ou que le détenu s'en désiste. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Lorsque l'examen de la plainte ou au grief est suspendu conformément au paragraphe (1), la personne chargée de cet examen doit en informer le délinquant par écrit." 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The Applicants' evidence is that at least one of them filed a written complaint, others made oral complaints and yet others were told that the complaints process did not apply to inmates in the TDU because they were considered members of the outside community - presumably because they were parolees. In any event, no action was taken on those complaints made until counsel became involved, late in the process. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The Applicants contend that the CSC violated the  
 CCRA 
  and  
 Regulations 
 , violated their s. 7 and s. 12  
 Charter 
  rights and violated the  
 Canadian Human Rights  
 Act 
  ( 
 CHRA 
 ). The Respondent, aside from denying any violation and/or jurisdiction in this Court to consider the rights issues under the  
 Charter 
  and  
 CHRA 
 , says that this Court should decline jurisdiction to hear this matter because of the existence of a grievance procedure. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The principal issue is whether the Court should decline to hear this matter because the Applicants did not utilize the internal complaints process. This is an issue of law which concerns this Court's jurisdiction and an interpretation of the legislation. As such, the standard of review is correctness. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Although standard of review was not a particular focus of this judicial review, to the extent that the Court must consider the actions and decisions of the CSC officials in respect of the matter of ventilating the TDU, the standard of review is reasonableness. The  
 Regulations 
 , in s. 81, contemplate alternative remedies other than the complaint process, which suggests low deference. The specifics of when and how to maintain healthy conditions engages the expertise of CSC officials and therefore suggests greater deference. However, the particular issue, the temperature and availability of clothes and blankets, is largely a rights-based dispute and suggests less deference. Finally, the dispute is one of mixed law and fact which again suggests reasonableness. All of these factors taken together lead to the conclusion that, in these circumstances, the standard of review is reasonableness. 
 
 
 
 A.  
 Violation of  
 CCRA 
  - Complaints Process 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  On the substantive matter of whether there was a breach of the obligation to provide a healthy environment - particularly that of heat in winter - the evidence is contradictory. The Court is mindful of the incentives and motives of persons in the position of the Applicants to make fanciful allegations. However, the allegations have a sufficient "ring of truth" that they must be assessed on the basis of the evidence in respect of each allegation. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The allegations are that the rear doors of the TDU were left open, that the cells became cold and that blankets and outdoor clothing were not made available or permitted. These allegations are supported by affidavit of first-hand witnesses. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The difficulty with the Respondent's contrary evidence is that it is so remote that it does not substantially rebut the Applicants' case. There was no evidence from persons who were present, e.g. guards, to counter the Applicants' evidence. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  Justice Blanchard accepted that the harm claimed by the Applicants occurred and I see no reason to depart from that finding particularly where the record on this aspect is largely the same. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Having concluded that the Applicants had at least a ground of complaint, the issue is whether this matter should be dealt with by this Court in light of the existence of a comprehensive grievance procedure mandated by the  
 Regulations 
 . 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  Justice Pelletier, while on the Trial Division, in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), had to deal with a similar issue. The learned judge recognized that there had to be exceptions to the general rule that an inmate had to exhaust internal remedies before seeking Court relief. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  In my view, the Court should not lightly interfere with the complaints process. There are strong policy and statutory reasons for requiring inmates to use this process. It is in cases of compelling circumstances, such as where there is actual physical or mental harm or clear inadequacy of the process that a departure from the complaints process would be justified (this is not an exhaustive list of the circumstances justifying departure from the usual process). 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  As recognized in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 362 W.A.C. 1, the complaints process is not a complete statutory code. While not dealing with freedom issues, as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 , the Court is faced with health issues which are serious matters. In addition, the factual background as to cold temperatures in the TDU is not substantially challenged which gives credence to the health concerns brought on by cold temperatures. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  As outlined earlier in these Reasons, s. 81 specifically contemplated an inmate seeking alternative legal remedies to those internal remedies. It is consistent with this regulatory scheme that, where there are urgent substantive matters and evident inadequacy in the internal procedures, it is open to the Court to consider the issue of remedial action. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  Because there are potential health issues and that the problems are seasonal, there is a need to resolve these complaints quickly. The prison complaint process has been criticized as slow and inadequate - see the  
 Annual Report of the Office of the Correctional Investigator 2005-2006 
  and the  
 Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Certain Events at the Prison for Women in Kingston 
  by the Honourable Louise Arbour. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  While there is a process for "prompt" action on complaints to shorten the usual grievance process of 6-12 months, the process is uncertain and depends to some extent on how the complaint is classified by CSC. This particular complaint is classified by the Respondent as one related to temperature and therefore not of great priority. The Applicants classify it is one of health deserving of greater priority. 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  In submissions, not rebutted, the Applicants contend that priority complaints can take up to six months to resolve and, at a minimum, 12 weeks to process. Persons held in the TDU, such as the Applicants, are held there for less than this minimum time, making the complaint process for any such complainant academic. The Respondent has not shown that the complaint process is adequate in these circumstances. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  Any alternative remedy must be timely and effective. There is no evidence that in respect to this complaint, or even complaints of a similar type, the process meets either criterion. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  Lastly, there is no assurance that complaints will be acted upon. There is evidence that these complaints were not. Four of the five Applicants claim that they complained - sometimes orally, sometimes in writing. Recognizing the frailties inherent in this type of allegation, the Respondent has presented no evidence that directly challenges these events or even the plausibility that these complaints were made. There is no evidence of a mechanism that assures that complaints reach the responsible person. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  The Court is left in the position, if the Respondent's submissions are accepted, of rejecting sworn evidence, not challenged or rebutted with plausible contrary evidence. One could ask rhetorically - on what basis would the Court reject this sworn evidence other than its sense that such allegations are easy to make and that there is motive to do so? 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  In my view, this is a thin basis for rejecting evidence. The Applicants are no longer in the TDU and gain nothing from pursuing their complaint. If they are successful, the most that is achieved is a continuance of Justice Blanchard's order that other inmates in the TDU receive heat in winter - hardly a motive for perjury. 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  In all these circumstances, I find that this is a proper case for departing from the requirement to follow the complaint process. I further find that based on a balance of probabilities, the Applicants' complaint is made out and that the Respondent failed to meet its statutory obligations and did not behave reasonably. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  Given that Justice Blanchard's interim order was effective, it should be continued with minor adjustment. The Respondent rightly is concerned that even a minor deviation from the temperature settings could be a breach of a court order. Therefore, a materiality provision will be inserted in the final order. 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  In the event that the Commissioner imposes a policy which eliminates the need to ventilate the TDU or there are other substantial changes of circumstance, the Respondent may apply to vacate this Order. 
 
 
 
 B.  
 Charter 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  Given the result in this case, it is not necessary to decide the  
 Charter 
  aspect of this judicial review. This is not a case where the  
 Charter 
  issue had to be raised first with the Commissioner; however, this is a case which can be decided without deciding a constitutional matter. The established jurisprudence is that in such instances, a court should decline to pronounce on  
 Charter 
  rights. ( 
 Reference Re Remuneration of Judges of the Provincial Court (P.E.I.) 
 , [1997] 3 S.C.R. 3; 217 N.R. 1; 206 A.R. 1; 156 W.A.C. 1; 121 Man.R.(2d) 1; 158 W.A.C. 1; 156 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 1; 483 A.P.R. 1) 
 
 
 
 C.  
 Canadian Human Rights  
 Act 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  The Applicants would have this Court make a finding that there is a breach of rights under the  
 CHRA 
  without that matter proceeding to the Canadian Human Rights Commission. Even if the Court has jurisdiction, I would decline to exercise it because the Applicants can complain to the Commission and because this Court has granted relief which addresses the core of the Applicants' complaint. 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  The Applicants' judicial review for a declaration and mandatory injunction will be granted upon terms contained in the Judgment. The Applicants shall have their costs as per the Judgment. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [42] 
   
 THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that 
 : 
 
 
 
 1. The Respondent, through Correctional Service Canada, has failed to meet the requirements of s. 86(1)(a) and 87(a) of the  
 Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
  and s. 83 of the  
 Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations 
  from approximately December 8, 2006 until the order of Justice Blanchard dated February 2, 2007. 
 
 
 
 2. Until this Order is varied or rescinded, Correctional Service Canada is prohibited from allowing the temperature at the Temporary Detention Unit at Matsqui Institution in Abbotsford, British Columbia, to drop, materially or for any significant period of time, below 20 degrees Celsius between the hours of 08:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and 16 degrees Celsius between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 08:00 a.m. 
 
 
 
 3. The Applicants shall have their costs in accordance with Column V of the Federal Court Tariff. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/gs 
 
 
 
 Appendix A 
 
 
 
 Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations 
 , S.O.R./92-620 
 
 
 
 "74(1) Where an offender is dissatisfied with an action or a decision by a staff member, the offender may submit a written complaint, preferably in the form provided by the Service, to the supervisor of that staff member. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where a complaint is submitted pursuant to subsection (1), every effort shall be made by staff members and the offender to resolve the matter informally through discussion. 
 
 
 
 "(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), a supervisor shall review a complaint and give the offender a copy of the supervisor's decision as soon as practicable after the offender submits the complaint. 
 
 
 
 "(4) A supervisor may refuse to review a complaint submitted pursuant to subsection (1) where, in the opinion of the supervisor, the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or is not made in good faith. 
 
 
 
 "(5) Where a supervisor refuses to review a complaint pursuant to subsection (4), the supervisor shall give the offender a copy of the supervisor's decision, including the reasons for the decision, as soon as practicable after the offender submits the complaint. 
 
 
 
 "75. Where a supervisor refuses to review a complaint pursuant to subsection 74(4) or where an offender is not satisfied with the decision of a supervisor referred to in subsection 74(3), the offender may submit a written grievance, preferably in the form provided by the Service, 
 
 
 
 (a) to the institutional head or to the director of the parole district, as the case may be; or 
 
 
 
 (b) where the institutional head or director is the subject of the grievance, to the head of the region. 
 
 
 
 "76(1) The institutional head, director of the parole district or head of the region, as the case may be, shall review a grievance to determine whether the subject-matter of the grievance falls within the jurisdiction of the Service. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where the subject-matter of a grievance does not fall within the jurisdiction of the Service, the person who is reviewing the grievance pursuant to subsection (1) shall advise the offender in writing and inform the offender of any other means of redress available. 
 
 
 
 "77(1) In the case of an inmate's grievance, where there is an inmate grievance committee in the penitentiary, the institutional head may refer the grievance to that committee. 
 
 
 
 "(2) An inmate grievance committee shall submit its recommendations respecting an inmate's grievance to the institutional head as soon as practicable after the grievance is referred to the committee. 
 
 
 
 "(3) The institutional head shall give the inmate a copy of the institutional head's decision as soon as practicable after receiving the recommendations of the inmate grievance committee. 
 
 
 
 "78. The person who is reviewing a grievance pursuant to section 75 shall give the offender a copy of the person's decision as soon as practicable after the offender submits the grievance. 
 
 
 
 "79(1) Where the institutional head makes a decision respecting an inmate's grievance, the inmate may request that the institutional head refer the inmate's grievance to an outside review board, and the institutional head shall refer the grievance to an outside review board. 
 
 
 
 "(2) The outside review board shall submit its recommendations to the institutional head as soon as practicable after the grievance is referred to the board. 
 
 
 
 "(3) The institutional head shall give the inmate a copy of the institutional head's decision as soon as practicable after receiving the recommendations of the outside review board. 
 
 
 
 "80(1) Where an offender is not satisfied with a decision of the institutional head or director of the parole district respecting the offender's grievance, the offender may appeal the decision to the head of the region. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where an offender is not satisfied with the decision of the head of the region respecting the offender's grievance, the offender may appeal the decision to the Commissioner. 
 
 
 
 "(3) The head of the region or the Commissioner, as the case may be, shall give the offender a copy of the head of the region's or Commissioner's decision, including the reasons for the decision, as soon as practicable after the offender submits an appeal. 
 
 
 
 "81(1) Where an offender decides to pursue a legal remedy for the offender's complaint or grievance in addition to the complaint and grievance procedure referred to in these Regulations, the review of the complaint or grievance pursuant to these Regulations shall be deferred until a decision on the alternate remedy is rendered or the offender decides to abandon the alternate remedy. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where the review of a complaint or grievance is deferred pursuant to subsection (1), the person who is reviewing the complaint or grievance shall give the offender written notice of the decision to defer the review. 
 
 
 
 "82. In reviewing an offender's complaint or grievance, the person reviewing the complaint or grievance shall take into consideration 
 
 
 
 (a) any efforts made by staff members and the offender to resolve the complaint or grievance, and any recommendations resulting therefrom; 
 
 
 
 (b) any recommendations made by an inmate grievance committee or outside review board; and 
 
 
 
 (c) any decision made respecting an alternate remedy referred to in subsection 81(1)." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "74(1) Lorsqu'il est insatisfait d'une action ou d'une décision de l'agent, le délinquant peut présenter une plainte au supérieur de cet agent, par écrit et de préférence sur une formule fournie par le Service. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Les agents et le délinquant qui a présenté une plainte conformément au paragraphe (1) doivent prendre toutes les mesures utiles pour régler la question de façon informelle. 
 
 
 
 "(3) Sous réserve des paragraphes (4) et (5), le supérieur doit examiner la plainte et fournir copie de sa décision au délinquant aussitôt que possible après que celui-ci a présenté sa plainte. 
 
 
 
 "(4) Le supérieur peut refuser d'examiner une plainte présentée conformément au paragraphe (1) si, à son avis, la plainte est futile ou vexatoire ou n'est pas faite de bonne foi. 
 
 
 
 "(5) Lorsque, conformément au paragraphe (4), le supérieur refuse d'examiner une plainte, il doit fournir au délinquant une copie de sa décision motivée aussitôt que possible après que celui-ci a présenté sa plainte. 
 
 
 
 "75. Lorsque, conformément au paragraphe 74(4), le supérieur refuse d'examiner la plainte ou que la décision visée au paragraphe 74(3) ne satisfait pas le délinquant, celui-ci peut présenter un grief, par écrit et de préférence sur une formule fournie par le Service: 
 
 
 
 a) soit au directeur du pénitencier ou au directeur de district des libérations conditionnelles, selon le cas; 
 
 
 
 b) soit, si c'est le directeur du pénitencier ou le directeur de district des libérations conditionnelles qui est mis en cause, au responsable de la région. 
 
 
 
 "76(1) Le directeur du pénitencier, le directeur de district des libérations conditionnelles ou le responsable de la région, selon le cas, doit examiner le grief afin de déterminer s'il relève de la compétence du Service. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Lorsque le grief porte sur un sujet qui ne relève pas de la compétence du Service, la personne qui a examiné le grief conformément au paragraphe (1) doit en informer le délinquant par écrit et lui indiquer les autres recours possibles. 
 
 
 
 "77(1) Dans le cas d'un grief présenté par le détenu, lorsqu'il existe un comité d'examen des griefs des détenus dans le pénitencier, le directeur du pénitencier peut transmettre le grief à ce comité. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Le comité d'examen des griefs des détenus doit présenter au directeur ses recommandations au sujet du grief du détenu aussitôt que possible après en avoir été saisi. 
 
 
 
 "(3) Le directeur du pénitencier doit remettre au détenu une copie de sa décision aussitôt que possible après avoir reçu les recommandations du comité d'examen des griefs des détenus. 
 
 
 
 "78. La personne qui examine un grief selon l'article 75 doit remettre copie de sa décision au délinquant aussitôt que possible après que le détenu a présenté le grief. 
 
 
 
 "79(1) Lorsque le directeur du pénitencier rend une décision concernant le grief du détenu, celui-ci peut demander que le directeur transmette son grief à un comité externe d'examen des griefs, et le directeur doit accéder à cette demande. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Le comité externe d'examen des griefs doit présenter au directeur du pénitencier ses recommandations au sujet du grief du détenu aussitôt que possible après en avoir été saisi. 
 
 
 
 "(3) Le directeur du pénitencier doit remettre au détenu une copie de sa décision aussitôt que possible après avoir reçu les recommandations du comité externe d'examen des griefs. 
 
 
 
 "80(1) Lorsque le délinquant est insatisfait de la décision rendue au sujet de son grief par le directeur du pénitencier ou par le directeur de district des libérations conditionnelles, il peut en appeler au responsable de la région. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Lorsque le délinquant est insatisfait de la décision rendue au sujet de son grief par le responsable de la région, il peut en appeler au commissaire. 
 
 
 
 "(3) Le responsable de la région ou le commissaire, selon le cas, doit transmettre au délinquant copie de sa décision motivée aussitôt que possible après que le délinquant a interjeté appel. 
 
 
 
 "81(1) Lorsque le délinquant décide de prendre un recours judiciaire concernant sa plainte ou son grief, en plus de présenter une plainte ou un grief selon la procédure prévue dans le présent règlement, l'examen de la plainte ou du grief conformément au présent règlement est suspendu jusqu'à ce qu'une décision ait été rendue dans le recours judiciaire ou que le détenu s'en désiste. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Lorsque l'examen de la plainte ou au grief est suspendu conformément au paragraphe (1), la personne chargée de cet examen doit en informer le délinquant par écrit. 
 
 
 
 "82. Lors de l'examen de la plainte ou du grief, la personne chargée de cet examen doit tenir compte: 
 
 
 
 a) des mesures prises par les agents et le délinquant pour régler la question sur laquelle porte la plainte ou le grief et des recommandations en découlant; 
 
 
 
 b) des recommandations faites par le comité d'examen des griefs des détenus et par le comité externe d'examen des griefs; 
 
 
 
 c) de toute décision rendue dans le recours judiciaire visé au paragraphe 81(1)." 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



