 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehcho First Nations v. Can. (A.G.) (2012), 417 F.T.R. 188 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. SE.009 
 
 
 
 Grand Chief Samuel Gargan on his own behalf and on behalf of all members of the Dehcho First Nations (applicants) v. The Attorney General of Canada, The Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development and Tlicho Government (respondents) 
 
 (T-1995-10; 2012 FC 1043; 2012 CF 1043) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Dehcho First Nations v. Canada (Attorney General) et al. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 O'Keefe, J. 
 
 August 30, 2012. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Northwest Territories Protected Areas Strategy was developed through multi-stakeholder participation from government, Aboriginal organizations, industry groups and non-industry organizations. It was intended to address concerns about the effects of mining on unique and important ecological regions in the Northwest Territories. It outlined an eight step process for accomplishing its goals. Commencing in June 2002, pursuant to the first four steps of the process, both the surface and subsurface of the Edéhzhie Candidate Protected Area (the Candidate area) was protected through successive Orders-in-Council (OIC's). To implement the fifth step, a working group, comprising of representatives of the Dehcho First Nations, Indian and Northern Affairs, the Government of the Northwest Territories and others was established to assess the ecological, cultural and economic values of the area. The group made a joint recommendation that an area covering 57% of the original Candidate area (the Recommended Area) be established as the permanent protected area. No agreement was reached on how subsurface protection would be achieved. The Dehcho Grand Chief and the Tlicho Government Grand Chief submitted a formal request for the designation of a national wildlife area with a permanent subsurface land withdrawal in the Recommended Area. The Crown adopted OIC SI/2010-84 under which the underlying subsurface rights were not withdrawn from the Candidate Area and were therefore available for disposition. As a result of the decreased level of protection and the Crown's diversion from the agreed upon eight-step process, the Dehcho First Nations applied for judicial review. The Governor in Council passed OIC SI/2011-111 which repealed OIC SI/201084. OIC SI/2011-111, which only applied to the Recommended Area, withdrew both surface and subsurface rights from disposition. The Crown moved to have the application dismissed as moot. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the motion. The application was not moot and, even if was, the court would have exercised its discretion to hear it due to the special circumstances that it presented. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 2286 
 
 Jurisdiction - Bars - Academic matters or moot issues - The Northwest Territories Protected Areas Strategy (the PAS) was developed through multi-stakeholder participation from government, Aboriginal organizations and others to address concerns about the effects of mining on unique and important ecological regions in the Northwest Territories - It outlined an eight step process for accomplishing its goals - Pursuant to the first four steps, both the surface and subsurface of the Edéhzhie Candidate Protected Area (the Candidate area) was protected through successive Orders-in-Council (OIC's) - To implement the fifth step, a working group was established to assess the ecological, cultural and economic values of the area - The group made a joint recommendation that an area covering 57% of the Candidate area (the Recommended Area) be established as the permanent protected area - No agreement was reached on how subsurface protection would be achieved - The Dehcho Grand Chief and the Tlicho Government Grand Chief formally requested the designation of a national wildlife area with a permanent subsurface land withdrawal in the Recommended Area - The Crown adopted OIC SI/2010-84 under which subsurface rights in the Candidate Area were available for disposition - The Dehcho First Nations applied for judicial review - The Crown adopted OIC SI/2011-111 which repealed OIC SI/201084 - OIC SI/2011-111, which only applied to the Recommended Area, withdrew both surface and subsurface rights from disposition - The Crown moved to have the application dismissed as moot - The Federal Court held that the application was not moot - Although OIC SI/2011-111 removed both surface and subsurface rights from disposition, it did so only in 57% of the Candidate area - Although the working group's recommendation only pertained to the Recommended Area, the last steps of the PAS process remained incomplete - Until the entire eight steps were completed, interim protection for the entire Candidate Area should have remained in place - Also, a request in the judicial review application for interim protection for the Candidate Area remained relevant - There also remained a live controversy regarding the Crown's unilateral adoption of OIC SI/2010-84 - This was an important issue to address as the treatment of the Candidate Area would serve as an important precedent for the future protection of other such areas across the Northwest Territories - See paragraphs 35 to 42. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 2286 
 
 Jurisdiction - Bars - Academic matters or moot issues - The Northwest Territories Protected Areas Strategy (the PAS) was developed through multi-stakeholder participation from government, Aboriginal organizations and others to address concerns about the effects of mining on unique and important ecological regions in the Northwest Territories - It outlined an eight step process for accomplishing its goals - Pursuant to the first four steps, both the surface and subsurface of the Edéhzhie Candidate Protected Area (the Candidate area) was protected through successive Orders-in-Council (OIC's) - To implement the fifth step, a working group was established to assess the ecological, cultural and economic values of the area - The group made a joint recommendation that an area covering 57% of the Candidate area (the Recommended Area) be established as the permanent protected area - No agreement was reached on how subsurface protection would be achieved - The Dehcho Grand Chief and the Tlicho Government Grand Chief formally requested the designation of a national wildlife area with a permanent subsurface land withdrawal in the Recommended Area - The Crown adopted OIC SI/2010-84 under which subsurface rights in the Candidate Area were available for disposition - The Dehcho First Nations applied for judicial review - The Crown adopted OIC SI/2011-111 which repealed OIC SI/201084 - OIC SI/2011-111, which only applied to the Recommended Area, withdrew both surface and subsurface rights from disposition - The Crown moved to have the application dismissed as moot - The Federal Court held that the application was not moot - Even if the application had been moot, the court would have exercised its discretion to hear it - In reaching that conclusion, the court considered the three relevant criteria - First, there were clearly possibilities of collateral consequences which provided the necessary adversarial context - If the application was dismissed, a new application challenging OIC SI/2011-111 would likely be brought - Also the manner in which the PAS process was treated for the Candidate Area would likely have an important impact on the success or failure of future efforts made within the process - When the OIC SI/2010-84 was in effect, subsurface rights might have been claimed throughout the Candidate Area - Secondly, the use of judicial resources to hear the application was justified - Questions of public importance regarding the relationship between the Crown and Aboriginal peoples were raised - Thirdly, the court was satisfied that it was not intruding into the role of the legislative branch - Further, the issue should be decided at this time, because, until it was, the lands outside the Recommended Area, but within the Candidate Area, continued to be available for resource staking and claiming - The effects of mining on ecologically sensitive lands raised potential long-term environmental impacts with broad social costs affecting Canadians across the country - See paragraphs 43 to 53. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Gregory J. McDade, Q.C., for the applicants; 
 
 Andrew E. Fox, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Ratcliff & Company, North Vancouver, British Columbia, for the applicants; 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This motion was heard at Edmonton, Alberta, on March 5, 2012, by O'Keefe, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following reasons for order on August 30, 2012. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 O'Keefe, J. 
 : This is a motion by the respondents, The Attorney General of Canada and The Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, for an order dismissing the applicants' judicial review application of Order-in-Council (OIC) SI/2010-84 on the grounds that it has been rendered moot. The respondents also request costs. 
 
 
 
 Background 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  This case arises from the implementation of the Northwest Territories Protected Areas Strategy (the NWT PAS). The NWT PAS was developed through multi-stakeholder participation from government, Aboriginal organizations, industry groups and non-industry organizations. It was intended to address concerns about the effects of mining on unique and important ecological regions in the Northwest Territories. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The NWT PAS outlined the following eight-step process for accomplishing its goals: 
 
 
 
 1. Identify priority areas of interest; 
 
 
 
 2. Prepare and review protected area proposal at regional level; 
 
 
 
 3. Review and submit proposal for candidate protected area status; 
 
 
 
 4. Consider and where necessary, apply interim protection for candidate area; 
 
 
 
 5. Evaluate candidate area; 
 
 
 
 6. Seek formal establishment of protected area; 
 
 
 
 7. Approve and designate protected area; and 
 
 
 
 8. Implement, monitor and review protected area. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The NWT PAS was officially signed in 1999 and shortly thereafter, the Horn Plateau in the Edéhzhíe was announced as one of the first candidate sites under the NWT PAS Implementation Phase. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The Edéhzhíe area is situated in the Mackenzie Valley in the Dehcho Region, within Treaty 11 in the Northwest Territories. The headwaters of three major drainage basins are located in the Edéhzhíe area: the Horn, Willowlake and Rabbitskin Rivers. The Edéhzhíe area is valued for its natural, cultural and spiritual importance by several First Nation communities. These communities are represented by the respondent, the Dehcho First Nations. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Pursuant to the first four steps of the NWT PAS process, the Edéhzhíe Candidate Protected Area (the Candidate Area) has been protected since June 2002 through successive OICs that have provided interim withdrawals of surface and subsurface right dispositions in the area. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  To implement the fifth step of the NWT PAS process, an Edéhzhíe Working Group comprising, amongst others, representatives of the applicants, Indian and Northern Affairs and the Government of Northwest Territories was established to assess the ecological, cultural and economic values of the area. After completing several ecological and non-renewable resource assessments, the Edéhzhíe Working Group made a joint recommendation that an area covering 57% of the original Candidate Area, referred to as the Edéhzhíe Recommended Boundary Area (the Recommended Area), be established as the permanent protected area. However, agreement was not reached on how subsurface protection would be achieved. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Based on the Edéhzhíe Working Group's joint recommendation and pursuant to the sixth step of the NWT PAS, the applicant Dehcho Grand Chief Sam Gargan and the Tlicho Government Grand Chief Joe Rabesca submitted a formal request to the respondent, the Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs, for a designation of the Edéhzhíe National Wildlife Area with a permanent subsurface land withdrawal in the Recommended Area. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Following receipt of this request, the respondents adopted OIC SI/2010-84, which came into force on October 31, 2010 for a two year period. Under this OIC, the surface rights for the Candidate Area as a whole were withdrawn from disposition. However, the underlying subsurface rights were not withdrawn and were therefore available for disposition. This differed from previous interim OICs over the Candidate Area, all of which had withdrawn both surface and subsurface rights from disposition. As a result of this decreased level of protection and the respondents' diversion from the agreed upon NWT PAS eight-step process, the applicants brought a judicial review application of OIC SI/2010-84. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  In their judicial review application, the applicants applied for various declarations and orders. They first applied to the Court for declarations that the respondents were in breach of: 
 
 
 
 1. Their agreement with the applicants, pursuant to the NWT PAS, to protect the Recommended Area; 
 
 
 
 2. Their agreement to negotiate in good faith with the applicants on the protection of the Candidate Area; 
 
 
 
 3. Their agreement to provide interim protection of the Candidate Area pending the completion of the NWT PAS Process; and 
 
 
 
 4. Their constitutional obligation to consult and, if appropriate, accommodate the applicants with respect to the decision to only extend partial protection to the Candidate Area and make the subject lands available for disposition of subsurface rights. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The applicants then applied for,  
 inter alia 
 , orders: 
 
 
 
 1. Quashing OIC SI/2010-84; 
 
 
 
 2. Directing the respondents to protect the Recommended Area in accordance with the NWT PAS; 
 
 
 
 3. In the alternative, directing the respondents to negotiate in good faith with the applicants on the protection of the Recommended Area and to implement interim protection of the Candidate Area pending completion of the NWT PAS; 
 
 
 
 4. Directing the respondents to consult and, if appropriate, accommodate the applicants with respect to the decision to only extend partial protection to the Candidate Area and make the subject lands available for disposition of subsurface rights; and 
 
 
 
 5. Providing interim protection of the Candidate Area, or alternatively the Recommended Area, pending a final determination of this Court on that application, prohibiting any prospecting, staking, locating or recording of any claim within that area. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Recently, on December 8, 2011 and pursuant to subsection 23(a) of the  
 Territorial Lands Act 
 , RSC 1985, c T-7, the Governor in Council passed OIC PC 2011-1537. On December 21, 2011, this OIC was registered as SI/2011-111. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  This new OIC repeals OIC SI/2010-84; the subject of the applicants' judicial review application. There are two main differences between the two OICs: OIC SI/2010-84 applied to the Candidate Area as a whole whereas the new OIC SI/2011-111 only applies to the Recommended Area; and OIC SI/2010-84 withdrew only surface rights from disposition, whereas OIC SI/2011-111 withdraws both surface and the subsurface rights from disposition in the subject area. 
 
 
 
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The respondents submit the following points at issue: 
 
 
 
 1. Does the Court have the jurisdiction to strike an application? 
 
 
 
 2. Is the application for judicial review moot? 
 
 
 
 3. Is there any reason that the Court should exercise its discretion to hear and decide the application despite the matter being moot? 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  I would rephrase the issues as follows: 
 
 
 
 1. Is the application for judicial review filed by the applicants moot? 
 
 
 
 2. In the alternative, if the application is moot, should this Court exercise its discretion and hear the application? 
 
 
 
 Respondents' Written Submissions 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The respondents submit that as OIC SI/2010-84 has been repealed by OIC SI/2011-111, a judicial review of OIC SI/2010-84 would now only be of hypothetical interest and is moot. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The respondents submit that the Court does have the jurisdiction to strike out an application where it is so clearly improper as to be bereft of any possibility of success, or where it is clear that the relief sought has become moot. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The respondents submit that as OIC SI/2010-84 is now repealed, there is no longer any live controversy with regards to the rights of any of the parties relating to it. Thus, the application for judicial review of OIC SI/2010-84 is moot. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Despite a matter being moot, the respondents acknowledge that the Court has the discretion to determine a matter if the circumstances so warrant. However, such discretion should be exercised sparingly and with consideration of the appropriate factors. In referring to this Court's decision in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, the respondents submit that the following three part framework should be applied in considering whether to hear an application despite it being moot: 
 
 
 
 1. Is there a continuing adversarial relationship? 
 
 
 
 2. Are there any special circumstances to warrant applying scarce judicial resources to resolving the legal issues posed in the application? 
 
 
 
 3. Would the Court be stepping beyond its adjudicative role if it were to continue to hear the application? 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  First, the respondents submit that as OIC SI/2010-84 is no longer in force and as there is nothing deriving from its prior existence that could currently affect the parties, there are no collateral consequences that may arise if this Court does not hear the application. The respondents submit that an adversarial relationship between the parties, with regards to the subject matter of the applicants' judicial review application, no longer exists. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  Second, the respondents submit that there are no special circumstances to justify continuing this judicial review. The respondents note that as OIC SI/2010-84 no longer has any effect on the legal rights of the parties, the requests for relief are no longer relevant. The respondents also highlight that OIC SI/2011-111 provides part of the relief sought in the applicants' judicial review application; namely, interim protection of the Recommended Area. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  In addition, the respondents submit that there is no reason to expect that the legal issues raised in this application are likely to recur frequently or that cases raising the same points will always disappear before being resolved. The respondents note that one of the central issues raised in this application, whether the Crown's duty to consult applies to legislative acts such as OICs, is currently before the BC Court of Appeal in the appeal of the decision of  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  The respondents also submit that there is nothing lost, either to the parties or to society in general, if the issues raised in the applicants' judicial review application are not decided at this time. The respondents note that OIC SI/2011-111 evidences that the goal of creating a National Wildlife Area in the Recommended Area continues. Thus, there are no social costs associated with leaving the application undecided. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Third, the respondents submit that the Court must be careful not to depart too far from its traditional role of resolving disputes. As there is no longer a dispute affecting the rights of the parties or the public in general, the respondents submit that there is no compelling reason for the Court to hear and rule on this application. Thus, convening a hearing and issuing a decision would serve no useful purpose. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  For these collective reasons, the respondents submit that the applicants' judicial review application should be struck, together with an award of costs for this motion. 
 
 
 
 Written Submissions of the Applicants (in the Judicial Review) Dehcho First Nations 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  The applicants firstly submit that the application for judicial review is not moot and therefore the Attorney General's motion should be dismissed. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  In the alternative, the applicants submit that should the motion be granted, then they should be granted lump sum costs of the main proceeding. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  The applicants submit that the respondents do not meet the first part of the test in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, as there is still a live controversy between the parties. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  If the Court grants the Attorney General's motion to dismiss, the applicants should be awarded their costs of the main application for judicial review and of this motion. 
 
 
 
 Written Submissions of the Tlicho Government 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  The Tlicho Government supports the submissions and arguments of Dehcho First Nations. 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  The Tlicho Government also submits that interim protection should be provided for the subject area pending completion of the PAS process. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  The Tlicho Government submitted that the issues raised are not moot. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  The Tlicho Government submitted that the application for judicial review should be scheduled for hearing. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  As to costs, the Tlicho Government adopts the position of the applicants. 
 
 
 
 Analysis and Decision 
 
 
 
 Issue 1 
 
 
 
 Is the application for judicial review filed by the applicants moot? 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  The doctrine of mootness permits a Court to refuse to decide a case if it only raises a hypothetical or abstract question (see  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). The first step in determining mootness is to assess whether the Court's decision will resolve a controversy that affects, or may affect, the rights of the parties. The controversy must be live both when the proceedings are first brought, as well as when the Court is called on to decide the case (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  In this case, there was clearly a controversy when the applicants first brought their judicial review application. This controversy arose from the respondents' early adoption of OIC SI/2010-84, which rendered subsurface rights available for disposition in the Candidate Area prior to the completion of the agreed upon NWT PAS eight step process. Nevertheless, the respondents argue that the repeal of OIC SI/2010-84 by OIC SI/2011-111 has eliminated this controversy and there is thus no live controversy currently before the Court. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  Although OIC SI/2011-111 removes both surface and subsurface rights from disposition, it does so only in a portion of the Candidate Area; namely, in the Recommended Area. Surface and subsurface rights are still available for disposition on the lands contained within the Candidate Area, but outside the Recommended Area boundaries. This is not insignificant, as the Recommended Area only comprises 57%, or just over half, of the territorial lands covered by the Candidate Area. 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  Further, although the Edéhzhíe Working Group's recommendation only pertained to the Recommended Area, the last steps of the NWT PAS process remain incomplete. Until the entire eight step NWT PAS process is complete, interim protection to the entire Candidate Area should remain in place. The seventh step of the NWT PAS requires that "appropriate regional bodies co-sign and announce protected area establishment agreement". The eighth and final step in the NWT PAS process is to manage, monitor and review the protected area. If surface and subsurface rights on the lands outside the Recommended Area, but within the Candidate Area, are available for disposition during this important review stage, it will be more difficult to incorporate all or portions of these lands at a later stage if the need is identified during the final stage. As noted in the initial NWT PAS Bi-Annual Report (1999-2001): "interim protection helps to ensure that the special values of the candidate site are not jeopardized during the next steps in the planning process". 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  Interim protection was also included by the applicants in the relief they sought in their judicial review application. However, no such interim protection is provided under OIC SI/2011-111, whose scope is limited to the Recommended Area. Thus, contrary to the situation in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, some of the relief sought by the applicants in this case does still remain relevant (at FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  There also remains a live controversy with regards to the respondents' unilateral adoption of OIC SI/2010-84. As I found in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, a live controversy can exist where a question arises as to the Minister's lawful exercise of its power (at FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). In this case, the respondents' action in enacting OIC SI/2010-84 was clearly questionable, particularly in light of the applicants' asserted Aboriginal and treaty rights and title to the Edéhzhíe area, which attracts the honour of the Crown. The fact that the respondents have repealed and replaced OIC SI/2010-84 enforces this finding. 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  In addition, this is an important issue to address at this point, as the Edéhzhíe Candidate Area is only one of the first few areas to be protected under the NWT PAS process. The treatment of this area will therefore serve as an important precedent for the future protection of other unique and important ecological areas across the Northwest Territories. 
 
 
 
 [42] 
  For these collective reasons, I find that a live controversy does still exist. Therefore, the applicants' judicial review application is not moot and should be heard by this Court. 
 
 
 
 Issue 2 
 
 
 
 In the alternative, if the application is moot, should this Court exercise its discretion and hear the application? 
 
 
 
 [43] 
  Despite a matter being moot, this Court retains the discretion to determine a matter if the circumstances so warrant. In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, Mr. Justice Sopinka explained that the following criteria were relevant to exercising this discretion (at pFRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED): 
 
 
 
 1. Continued adversarial relationship; 
 
 
 
 2. Judicial economy; and 
 
 
 
 3. Court's role as the adjudicative branch. 
 
 
 
 [44] 
  Although all three factors are relevant, Mr. Justice Sopinka acknowledged that "[t]he presence of one or two of the factors may be overborne by the absence of the third, and vice versa" (see  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [45] 
  With regards to the first criteria, Mr. Justice Sopinka explained that (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED): 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 [46] 
  In this case, there are clearly possibilities of collateral consequences. As mentioned above, the new OIC SI/2011-111 does address the disposition of subsurface rights in the Recommended Area, but does not provide interim protection to the lands located outside the Recommended Area boundaries, but within the Candidate Area boundaries. It is thus likely that if this judicial review application is not heard, the applicants will bring a judicial review application of OIC SI/2011-111. In addition, the Edéhzhíe Candidate Area is only one of the first areas to be protected under the NWT PAS process. Thus, the manner in which the different parties treat the NWT PAS process for this area will likely have an important impact on the success or failure of future efforts made within this process. Finally, during the time that OIC SI/2010-84 was in effect, prior to its repeal by OIC SI/2011-111, it is possible that subsurface rights were claimed throughout the entire Candidate Area. These potential collateral consequences provide the necessary adversarial context favouring this Court's exercise of its discretion to hear the applicants' judicial review application. 
 
 
 
 [47] 
  Turning to the second criteria, Mr. Justice Sopinka explained in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [48] 
  In this case, there are several factors that justify the use of judicial resources to hear the applicants' judicial review application. Again, this is one of the first implementation efforts of the NWT PAS process; a process produced from collective multi-stakeholder efforts and intended for recurring and wide use to protect ecologically sensitive lands across the Territory. In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, I also considered that it was important that the applicable government policy had been extended to apply to several other sites (at FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [49] 
  This case also raises questions of public importance regarding the relationship between the Crown and Aboriginal peoples. When such questions arise, it is important to recall that the honour of the Crown is always at stake in its dealings with Aboriginal peoples (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). As Chief Justice McLachlin explained in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [50] 
  Thus, in summary, I find that this case raises sufficient special circumstances to justify the use of judicial resources. 
 
 
 
 [51] 
  Third, Mr. Justice Sopinka explained that the Court must be cognizant of its proper law-making function. Else, "[p]ronouncing judgments in the absence of a dispute affecting the rights of the parties may be viewed as intruding into the role of the legislative branch" (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). As mentioned above, although OIC SI/2011-111 provides a greater level of protection within the Recommended Area, it leaves a large portion of land outside these boundaries unprotected from surface and subsurface claims while the final steps of the NWT PAS process remain incomplete. I therefore do not find that this Court will be intruding into the role of the legislative branch by hearing the applicants' application. 
 
 
 
 [52] 
  Further, this issue should be decided at this time, because until it does, the lands outside the Recommended Area, but within the Candidate Area, continue to be available for resource staking and claiming. Such staking or claiming raises the potential concerns from the effects of mining on ecologically sensitive lands that the NWT PAS was intended to address. Such effects, although local in the short-term, raise potential long-term environmental impacts with broad social costs affecting Canadians across the country. 
 
 
 
 [53] 
  In summary, even if the applicants' judicial review application is considered moot, I find that this Court should exercise its discretion and hear the application due to the special circumstances that it presents. 
 
 
 
 [54] 
  The motion of the respondents is dismissed with costs to the applicants and Tlicho Government. 
 
 
 
 ORDER 
 
 
 
 [55] 
   
 THIS COURT ORDERS that 
  the motion of the respondents is dismissed with costs to the applicants and Tlicho Government. 
 
 
 
 Motion dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/vnh 
 
 
 
 ANNEX 
 
 
 
 Relevant Statutory Provisions 
 
 
 
 Territorial Lands Act 
 , RSC 1985, c T-7 
 
 
 
 23. The Governor in Council may 
 
 
 
 (a) on setting out the reasons for withdrawal in the order, order the withdrawal of any tract or tracts of territorial lands from disposal under this Act; 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 23. Le gouverneur en conseil peut: 
 
 
 
 a) par décret motivé, déclarer inaliénables des parcelles territoriales; 
 
 
 

