 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 332)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Noël, J.
March 16, 2015.
Counsel:
Douglas Lehrer, for the applicant;
Nicole Rahaman, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
VanderVennen Lehrer, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Noël, J.
: This is an application by Rosalba Lomelin Caliman [the Applicant] for leave to commence an application for judicial review pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA] of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division [RPD] dated October 29, 2013. The RPD held that the Applicant was neither a Convention Refugee nor a person in need of protection within the meaning of sections 96 and 97 of IRPA.
II.
Facts
[2]
The Applicant is a 65 years old Colombian citizen.
[3]
She claimed that her family had relationships with a municipal councillor, who is allegedly targeted by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia [FARC]. The Applicant alleged that in 2005, the FARC killed four councillors and a secretary and injured many others. One of the councillors killed was her son-in-law's brother. Her son-in-law's sister, a journalist, was also injured. The Applicant's daughter and her family made successful refugee claims in Canada in 2005.
[4]
The Applicant also claimed that, in December 2005, she was approached numerous times and received threatening calls from the FARC. She alleged to have moved 14 times afterwards.
[5]
In August or September 2006, the Applicant was denied a visitor's visa to Canada.
[6]
In August 2007, the Applicant's tenant claimed that strangers were filming the Applicant's house. She also claimed to have been approached by strangers inquiring about her son. She reported these incidents to the police.
[7]
She then applied for refugee protection at the Canadian Embassy in Colombia in September 2007, but claimed she did not receive any response.
[8]
The Applicant also stated to have received various threats in February 2009, July 2010, October 2011 and October 2012. She did not, however, report these threats neither to the police nor to the Canadian embassy.
[9]
The Applicant traveled to Panama in October 2009 and to Venezuela in January 2012.
[10]
The Applicant's refugee claim was refused by the Canadian embassy in Colombia on March 25, 2013. She received a United States of America [USA] visitor's visa on May 16, 2013. She flew to the USA on July 1, 2013. She left for Canada three weeks later. She made a refugee claim in Canada on July 25, 2013. Her claim was refused on October 29, 2013. This is the decision under review.
III.
Impugned Decision
[11]
The Minister intervened before the RPD pursuant to subsection 170(e) of IRPA and section 29 of the
Refugee Protection Division Rules
, SOR/2012-256 [the Rules].
[12]
The RPD accepted an application received on October 2, 2013, from counsel of the Applicant, to accept post hearing documents pursuant to rule 43(3) of the Rules.
[13]
The RPD first stated that it had credibility concerns regarding the Applicant's travel history. The Applicant's passport shows that the Applicant travelled to Panama in 2009 and Venezuela in 2012, but her answers when questioned about those travels were evasive. When questioned about why she had not made a refugee claim in Panama or Venezuela, she explained that she had family in Colombia and that she would not stay in Panama or Venezuela. The RPD found that the Applicant's re-availment to Colombia, after claiming that several encounters with the FARC made her feel unsafe anywhere in Colombia, undermined her credibility. The RPD thus found that the Applicant lacked a subjective fear of persecution.
[14]
With regards to the issue of State Protection, the RPD concluded, after considering the totality of the evidence and counsel's submissions, that the Applicant had failed to rebut the presumption of adequate state protection. The RPD also found that the Applicant had not established that protection in Colombia would not be forthcoming or that it would be objectively unreasonable to seek that protection from the FARC if she were to return to Colombia.
[15]
The RPD therefore did not accept that the Applicant is a refugee pursuant to sections 96 and 97 of IRPA.
IV.
Parties' Submissions
[16]
The Applicant first submits that the RPD did not make clear in its reasons which portions of the Applicant's evidence it rejected as not being credible. The Applicant also submits that the RPD ignored documentary evidence that corroborated her oral testimony about her problems in Colombia with regards to the FARC and the failure of the Colombian authorities to provide her adequate state protection.
[17]
The Respondent retorts by arguing that the RPD can consider the Applicant's failure to claim asylum in other countries before coming to Canada and that it was entitled to consider reavailments to her country of persecution. The RPD's conclusion that the Applicant's actions were not consistent with her stated fear is reasonable.
[18]
The Applicant finally submits that the RPD did not use the proper test in its evaluation of state protection. The Applicant argues that the RPD used a "serious efforts" test while it was to assess the "operation adequacy" of state protection available to the Applicant. The RPD also ignored corroborating evidence on the conflict with the FARC in Colombia. The Respondent submits that the decision does show that the RPD dealt with operational adequacy of the country when dealing with the FARC and that the RPD did not have to refer to all documents submitted.
V.
Issues
[19]
I have reviewed the parties' submissions and respective records and I formulate the issues as follows:
1. Is the RPD's assessment of the Applicant's credibility and lack of subjective fear reasonable?
2. Did the RPD err in its analysis of state protection?
VI.
Standard of Review
[20]
Whether the RPD's credibility assessment of the Applicant is reasonable is mainly a factual determination (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Intertwined with this issue in this matter is the RPD's assessment of the Applicant's lack of subjective fear, which is a determination of mixed facts and law. The standard of reasonableness is again applicable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). This standard also applies to the issue of state protection, which also raises questions of mixed facts and law (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Thus, on all issues, this Court shall only intervene if it concludes that the decision is unreasonable and falls outside the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] SCJ No 9 at para 47).
VII.
Analysis
A.
Is the RPD's assessment of the Applicant's credibility and lack of subjective fear reasonable?
[21]
Credibility determinations by the RPD are afforded deference (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). Indeed, credibility determinations are at the heart of the RPD's jurisdiction (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). This Court will only intervene if the RPD "based its decision or order on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  116 FTR 310 at para 6; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at para 35). In the case at bar, the RPD's assessment of the Applicant's credibility and her lack of subjective fear are essentially based on her travel history outside of Colombia, specifically in Panama and Venezuela. I find the RPD's negative credibility determination reasonable. Indeed, the Applicant first denied to have travelled to any countries outside Colombia and then admitted to have travelled to Panama in 2009 and to Venezuela in 2012, with a group of teachers for the purpose of "just visiting" (Certified Tribunal Record [CTR] page 797 at line 20; Applicant's Record [AR] pages 9-10 at para 19). It seems that the Applicant was trying to provide vague explanations to the RPD's questions. It was thus reasonable for the RPD to draw a negative credibility inference from the Applicant's explications and information before it.
[22]
Moreover, while the Applicant claimed to have feared the FARC since 2005, she did not make a refugee protection while in Panama in 2009 or Venezuela in 2012, simply because that was not the purpose of her travels and because she did not have family in those countries. She also did not claim refugee protection when she arrived in the United States in 2013. This Court has recognized that an applicant's failure to claim refugee protection in a country where the applicant travels can indicate a lack of subjective fear ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at para 28;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Therefore, based on the information before the RPD and on the explanations provided by the Applicant at the hearing, it was reasonable for the RPD to conclude that the Applicant lacked a subjective fear of persecution if she were to return to Colombia. Indeed, her actions, namely her travels, are inconsistent with her stated fear of persecution.
[23]
Lastly, the Applicant argues that the RPD erred in ignoring documentary evidence corroborating the Applicant's situation. This Court has held, however, that the RPD does not need to refer to every piece of evidence before it. Only when the non-mentioned evidence is critical and contradicts the RPD's conclusion can a reviewing Court
may
conclude that its omission means that it did not consider the material before it (my emphasis) ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at para 39;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  157 FTR 35 at para 16). Moreover, the RPD is presumed to have considered the entire record before it (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In the case at bar, a reading of the RPD decision demonstrates that the RPD considered the documentation before it in rendering its decision. Indeed, this can be seen at paragraph 19 of the decision, with regards to the references to the Applicant's passport, at paragraph 26, where the RPD comments on the Post Hearing documents submitted by the Applicant, at paragraph 27, where the RPD refers to the articles submitted by the Applicant and even more so when the RPD discusses the question of state protection at paragraphs 36 to 54. It is therefore reasonable to conclude that the RPD considered the record presented before it in rendering its decision. Having carefully reviewed the evidence, the facts related to the Applicant, her attempts to come to Canada, her trips outside Colombia and the fact that her daughter with her family lives in Canada since 2005, there is an implicit objective that is continually being sought by the Applicant, which is the strong desire to come to Canada. For that purpose, the Applicant wrongly relied on the non-existing factual fear. The credibility findings have made that evident.
B.
Did the RPD err in its analysis of state protection?
[24]
The issue of state protection is not determinative of this judicial review as the RPD's credibility assessment of the Applicant along with its conclusion that the Applicant lacked subjective fear if returned to Colombia is reasonable. That being said, I will make the following comments.
[25]
Although the RPD makes references to the "serious efforts" undertaken by the State in its analysis of State protection, the RPD also makes references to the Applicant's efforts while in Colombia in its evaluation of state protection. Indeed, the RPD stated the following:
[C]olombia's efforts to eliminate FARC are indicated within the documentary evidence. The assertion of the claimant that the police do not offer state protection is unsubstantiated. The claimant did not test the state's ability to offer protection by seeking redress when her complaints were not actioned (AR page 13 at para 38).
[26]
The RPD further evaluated the Applicant's allegations that she had submitted four denunciations to the police, dating back to 2006. When questioned as to what her expectations were with regards to state protection, the Applicant replied that she expected the police would investigate. She then explained that she never followed-up on the status of the investigations (AR page 13 at paras 39-40). It is in that context and with the information provided by the Applicant that the RPD assessed the question of state protection. Because the Applicant did not demonstrate how state protection was not available to her (AR page 14 at para 42), the RPD could only assess the documentation provided on what steps the government of Colombia is taking with regards to the FARC. This RPD's conclusion on State protection is thus reasonable.
[27]
Having said that, the vocabulary used by the RPD (the use of "serious efforts" four times) to assess the country's capability to protect their citizens has to be taken in light of all the reasons given to analyse the state protection given. When read as a whole, the reasons show that the RPD was in reality assessing Colombia's operational adequacy in dealing with the FARC and in protecting its own citizens. The RPD does an analysis of the measures taken by the country, comments objectively on them and concludes that the Applicant has not established that if returned to Colombia, protection would not be reasonably forthcoming or that it is unreasonable for her to seek that protection if she was to encounter problems with the FARC.
[28]
As for the argument that the RPD did not refer to Brittain and Chernick respective report and the 2011 report of the Canadian Council for refugees, as noted by the Respondent, jurisprudence of this Court has determined that it was not an error not to specifically refer to the reports (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )
.
I come to the same conclusion. Therefore, the RPD's decision is thus reasonable.
VIII.
Conclusion
[29]
The RPD's negative credibility assessment of the Applicant and its conclusion that the Applicant lacked a subjective fear of persecution are reasonable. The RPD's evaluation of state protection is also reasonable based on the information provided to the RPD by the Applicant. The intervention of this Court is thus not warranted.
[30]
The parties were invited to submit questions for certification, but none were proposed.
JUDGMENT
[31]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that:
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed.
2. There is no serious question of general importance to be certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Noël
[Traduction]: La Cour est saisie d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire, présentée par Rosalba Lomelin Caliman [la demanderesse] en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [la LIPR], de la décision du 29 octobre 2013 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés [la SPR] a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait ni qualité de réfugiée au sens de la Convention ni celle de personne à protéger suivant les articles 96 et 97 de la LIPR.
II.
Les faits
[2]
La demanderesse est une citoyenne colombienne âgée de 65 ans.
[3]
La demanderesse a affirmé que sa famille avait des relations avec un conseiller municipal, lequel serait ciblé par les Forces armées révolutionnaires de Colombie [les FARC]. La demanderesse a allégué qu'en 2005, les FARC ont tué quatre conseillers et un secrétaire et blessé plusieurs autres personnes. L'un des conseillers tués était le frère de son gendre. La sœur de son gendre, une journaliste, fut également blessée. La fille de la demanderesse et sa famille ont présenté des demandes d'asile au Canada en 2005. Ces demandes ont été acceptées
[4]
La demanderesse a également fait valoir qu'en décembre 2005, elle a été abordée à plusieurs reprises et a reçu des appels menaçants des FARC. Elle a dit avoir déménagé 14 fois par la suite.
[5]
En août ou en septembre 2006, le Canada a refusé d'accorder un visa de visiteur à la demanderesse.
[6]
En août 2007, le locataire de la demanderesse a affirmé que des étrangers filmaient le domicile de la demanderesse. Elle a également fait valoir que des étrangers lui ont posé des questions sur son fils. Elle a signalé ces incidents à la police.
[7]
Elle a ensuite présenté une demande d'asile à l'ambassade du Canada en Colombie en septembre 2007, mais elle a affirmé qu'elle n'a reçu aucune réponse.
[8]
En outre, la demanderesse a affirmé avoir fait l'objet de menaces en février 2009, en juillet 2010, en octobre 2011 et en octobre 2012. Toutefois, elle n'a pas rapporté ces menaces à la police ou à l'ambassade du Canada.
[9]
La demanderesse s'est rendue au Panama en octobre 2009, puis au Venezuela en janvier 2012.
[10]
Le 25 mars 2013, l'ambassade du Canada en Colombie a refusé la demande d'asile présentée par la demanderesse. La demanderesse a obtenu un visa de visiteur aux États-Unis [É.-U.] le 16 mai 2013. Elle s'est rendue aux É.-U. par avion le 1er juillet 2013. Puis elle est partie pour le Canada trois semaines plus tard. Elle a présenté une demande d'asile au Canada le 25 juillet 2013. Cette demande fut refusée le 29 octobre 2013. Il s'agit de la décision faisant l'objet du contrôle.
III.
La décision contestée
[11]
Le ministre est intervenu devant la SPR en vertu de l'alinéa 170
e
) de la LIPR et de l'article 29 des
Règles de la section de la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2012-256 [les Règles].
[12]
La SPR a accepté une demande présentée par le conseil de la demanderesse le 2 octobre 2013 visant la transmission de documents à admettre en preuve conformément au paragraphe 43(3) des Règles.
[13]
La SPR a d'abord déclaré qu'elle accordait peu de crédibilité au témoignage de la demanderesse au sujet des voyages. Le passeport de la demanderesse montre qu'elle s'est rendue au Panama en 2009 et au Venezuela en 2012, mais ses réponses aux questions posées à ce sujet étaient évasives. Lorsqu'on lui a demandé pourquoi elle n'avait pas demandé l'asile au Panama ou au Venezuela, elle a expliqué qu'elle avait de la famille en Colombie et qu'elle ne voulait pas demeurer au Panama ou au Venezuela. La SPR a tiré une conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité de la demanderesse après que celle-ci se soit à nouveau réclamée de la protection de la Colombie, après avoir affirmé qu'elle se sentait en danger partout dans le pays après de nombreux contacts avec les FARC. La SPR a estimé que la demanderesse n'avait pas de crainte subjective de persécution.
[14]
S'agissant de la protection de l'État, la SPR a conclu, après avoir examiné l'ensemble de la preuve et les observations des avocats, que la demanderesse n'avait pas réfuté la présomption selon laquelle la protection de l'État est suffisante. La SPR a également conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas établi que la protection en Colombie ne serait pas suffisante ou qu'il serait objectivement déraisonnable de demander cette protection contre les FARC, si elle devait retourner en Colombie.
[15]
La SPR a donc refusé la demande d'asile de la demanderesse conformément aux articles 96 et 97 de la LIPR.
IV.
Observations des parties
[16]
La demanderesse fait d'abord valoir que la SPR n'a pas clairement expliqué dans ses motifs quelles parties du témoignage de la demanderesse elle avait jugé non crédibles. La demanderesse soutient également que la SPR a ignoré des éléments de preuve documentaire corroborant son témoignage sur les problèmes qu'elle avait vécus en Colombie avec les FARC et le manquement des autorités colombiennes à lui fournir une protection de l'État suffisante.
[17]
Le défendeur lui répond en affirmant que la SPR peut tenir compte du fait que la demanderesse n'a pas demandé l'asile dans d'autres pays avant de venir au Canada, et qu'elle pouvait tenir compte du fait qu'elle se soit à nouveau réclamée de la protection du pays où elle était persécutée. La conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle les actions de la demanderesse n'étaient pas cohérentes avec sa crainte déclarée est une conclusion raisonnable.
[18]
Enfin, la demanderesse soutient que la SPR n'a pas utilisé le bon critère dans son évaluation de la protection de l'État. La demanderesse fait valoir que la SPR a utilisé le critère fondé sur les « sérieux efforts », alors qu'il fallait plutôt évaluer « le caractère satisfaisant des efforts concrets » de protection dont elle pouvait se réclamer en Colombie. La SPR a également ignoré des éléments de preuve corroborant le conflit avec les FARC en Colombie. Selon le défendeur, la décision montre que la SPR a tenu compte du caractère suffisant de la protection de l'État lorsqu'il est question des FARC et que la SPR n'était pas obligée de considérer tous les documents produits.
V.
Les questions en litige
[19]
J'ai examiné les observations des parties et leur dossier respectif et je formule comme suit les questions à trancher:
1. L'appréciation de la SPR concernant la crédibilité de la demanderesse et l'absence d'une crainte subjective est-elle raisonnable?
2. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur dans son évaluation de la protection de l'État?
VI.
La norme de contrôle
[20]
La question de savoir si l'appréciation de la crédibilité faite par la SPR est raisonnable est essentiellement une décision reposant sur les faits (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). L'appréciation de l'absence de crainte subjective de la demanderesse est étroitement liée à cette question, et cette appréciation est aussi une question mixte de fait et de droit. La norme du caractère raisonnable s'applique également à cette question (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). Cette norme s'applique aussi à la question de la protection de l'État, qui soulève également des questions mixtes de fait et de droit (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Par conséquent, relativement à toutes ces questions, la Cour n'interviendra que si elle conclut que la décision est déraisonnable et si elle n'appartient pas aux « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACS no 9, au paragraphe 47).
VII.
Analyse
A.
L'évaluation de la SPR à l'égard de la crédibilité et de l'absence de crainte subjective de la demanderesse est-elle raisonnable?
[21]
La Cour doit appliquer le principe de déférence aux conclusions de la SPR en matière de crédibilité (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 31 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). L'évaluation de la crédibilité constitue l'essentiel de la compétence de la SPR (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). La Cour interviendra uniquement si la SPR a rendu « une décision ou une ordonnance fondée sur une conclusion de fait erronée, tirée de façon abusive ou arbitraire ou sans tenir compte des éléments dont [elle] dispose » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  116 FTR 310 au paragraphe 6; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 35). Dans la présente affaire, les conclusions de la SPR concernant la crédibilité de la demanderesse et l'absence de crainte subjective reposent essentiellement sur ses voyages à l'extérieur de la Colombie, particulièrement au Panama et au Venezuela. J'estime que les conclusions défavorables de la SPR relatives à la crédibilité sont raisonnables. La demanderesse a d'abord nié avoir voyagé hors de la Colombie et elle a ensuite admis s'être rendue au Panama en 2009 et au Venezuela en 2012, avec un groupe d'enseignants dans l'unique but [traduction] « de faire une visite » (dossier certifié du tribunal [DCT], à la page 797, ligne 20; dossier de la demanderesse [DD], aux pages 9 et 10, paragraphe 19). Il semble que la demanderesse tentait de fournir des réponses vagues aux questions de la SPR. Il était donc raisonnable que la SPR tire des conclusions défavorables concernant la crédibilité en fonction des explications et des renseignements dont elle disposait.
[22]
En outre, bien que la demanderesse ait affirmé qu'elle craignait les FARC depuis 2005, elle n'a pas demandé l'asile au Panama en 2009 ou au Venezuela en 2012, simplement parce qu'elle ne voyageait pas dans ce but et parce qu'elle n'a pas de famille dans ces pays. De plus, elle n'a pas demandé l'asile à son arrivée aux États-Unis en 2013. La Cour a reconnu que le fait pour un demandeur de ne pas demander l'asile dans un pays où il peut se rendre indique une absence de crainte subjective ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 28;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Par conséquent, selon les renseignements remis à la SPR et les explications fournies par la demanderesse au cours de l'audience, la SPR a raisonnablement conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas de crainte subjective de persécution si elle retournait en Colombie. Ses actions, à savoir ses voyages, sont incompatibles avec sa crainte de persécution déclarée.
[23]
Enfin, la demanderesse affirme que la SPR a commis une erreur lorsqu'elle a écarté les éléments de preuve documentaire corroborant sa situation. Cependant, la Cour a statué que la SPR n'a pas besoin de mentionner chaque élément de preuve qui lui a été présenté. Ce n'est que lorsque l'élément de preuve non mentionné est important et contredit la conclusion de la SPR que la cour de révision
peut
décider que celle-ci n'a pas tenu compte des éléments dont elle disposait (non souligné dans l'original) ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 39;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  157 FTR 35, au paragraphe 16). De plus, la Cour tient pour acquis que la SPR a pris en compte l'ensemble du dossier dont elle disposait (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Dans la présente affaire, la lecture de la décision de la SPR montre qu'elle a examiné les éléments dont elle disposait avant de prendre sa décision. En effet, on peut constater ce fait au paragraphe 19 de la décision, lorsqu'il est question du passeport de la demanderesse; au paragraphe 26, dans les commentaires de la SPR au sujet des documents soumis par la demanderesse après l'audience; au paragraphe 27, lorsque la SPR parle des articles présentés par la demanderesse et encore plus lorsque la SPR examine la question de la protection de l'État aux paragraphes 36 à 54. Il est donc raisonnable de conclure que la SPR a examiné le dossier qui lui avait été présenté avant de rendre sa décision. On constate, en examinant attentivement les éléments de preuve, les faits touchant la demanderesse, ses tentatives pour venir au Canada, ses voyages à l'extérieur de la Colombie et le fait que sa fille vit au Canada depuis 2005 avec sa famille, que l'objectif implicite sans cesse recherché par la demanderesse était de venir au Canada. C'est pourquoi la demanderesse a eu tort de se fonder sur certains faits pour invoquer une crainte inexistante. Les conclusions en matière de crédibilité font ressortir cette évidence.
B.
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur dans son évaluation de la protection de l'État?
[24]
La question de la protection de l'État ne sceller le sort du présent contrôle judiciaire, étant donné que l'appréciation de la SPR concernant la crédibilité de la demanderesse et sa conclusion selon laquelle la demanderesse n'avait aucune crainte subjective si elle devait retourner en Colombie sont raisonnable. Cela dit, je ferai les observations suivantes.
[25]
Bien que dans son analyse de la protection de l'État la SPR se penche sur les « efforts sérieux » faits par l'État, son évaluation tient également compte des efforts faits par la demanderesse à cet égard en Colombie. Voici ce qu'a affirmé la SPR:
Les efforts de la Colombie pour éliminer les FARC sont mentionnés dans la preuve documentaire. L'affirmation de la demandeure d'asile selon laquelle la police n'offre pas de protection n'est pas corroborée. La demandeure d'asile n'a pas vérifié la capacité de l'État à assurer sa protection en tentant d'obtenir lorsque ses plaintes n'étaient pas traitées (DD, à la page 13, paragraphe 38).
[26]
De plus, la SPR a examiné les allégations de la demanderesse selon lesquelles elle avait fait quatre dénonciations à la police à partir de 2006. En réponse à la question de savoir quelles avaient été ses attentes quant à la protection de l'État, la demanderesse a affirmé qu'elle s'attendait à ce que la police fasse une enquête. Elle a ensuite expliqué qu'elle n'avait jamais effectué de suivi pour savoir où en étaient les enquêtes (DD, à la page 13, paragraphes 39 et 40). La SPR a donc évalué la question de la protection de l'État dans ce contexte et avec les renseignements fournis par la demanderesse. Puisque la demanderesse n'avait pas établi qu'elle ne pouvait se réclamer de la protection de l'État (DD, à la page 14, paragraphe 42), la SPR pouvait uniquement évaluer la documentation fournie au sujet des mesures prises par le gouvernement de la Colombie pour lutter contre les FARC. La conclusion de la SPR sur la protection de l'État est donc raisonnable.
[27]
Cela dit, le vocabulaire utilisé par la SPR (elle a employé l'expression « sérieux efforts » quatre fois) dans son évaluation de la capacité de l'État à protéger ses citoyens doit être considéré à la lumière de tous les motifs invoqués pour analyser la protection de l'État offerte. Dans l'ensemble, les motifs montrent que la SPR a en réalité évalué le caractère satisfaisant des efforts concrets déployés par la Colombie pour lutter contre les FARC et pour protéger ses propres citoyens. La SPR a examiné les mesures prises par le pays, fait des commentaires objectifs à ce sujet, et conclu que la demanderesse n'a pas établi que si elle retournait en Colombie, elle ne pourrait raisonnablement se réclamer de la protection de l'État ou qu'il serait déraisonnable pour elle de chercher à obtenir cette protection si elle éprouvait des problèmes avec les FARC.
[28]
Quant à l'argument selon lequel la SPR n'a pas tenu compte des rapports respectifs de M. Brittain et de M. Chernick et du rapport de 2011 du Conseil canadien pour les réfugiés, le défendeur fait remarquer que selon la jurisprudence de notre Cour, le fait de ne pas expressément renvoyer aux rapports ne constitue pas une erreur (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 28;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 10;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 60;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 21)
.
La décision de la SPR est donc raisonnable.
VIII.
Conclusion
[29]
L'appréciation défavorable de la crédibilité de la demanderesse par la SPR et sa conclusion selon laquelle la demanderesse n'avait pas de crainte subjective de persécution sont raisonnables. L'évaluation de la protection de l'État par la SPR est également raisonnable compte tenu des renseignements fournis par la demanderesse. L'intervention de la Cour n'est donc pas justifiée.
[30]
Les parties ont été invitées à soulever une question aux fins de certification, mais aucune n'a été proposée.
JUGEMENT
[31]
LA COUR STATUE que:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
2. Il n'y a aucune question grave de portée générale à certifier.
[End of document]