[1]
Cullen, J.
: The style of cause in this case will be amended to indicate the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration as respondent.
[2]
This is an application for judicial review, pursuant to leave granted by Mr. Justice Rothstein, of a decision of the Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the Board"), dated November 19, 1993, in which it determined that the applicant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, was not a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended ("the
Act
").
Facts
[3]
The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He was born in Jaffna, Sri Lanka on March 17, 1953. He claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution based on his race, political opinion, and membership in a particular social group.
[4]
The applicant testified that he was the manager of a large food and clothing cooperative in Jaffna. In December 1990, the members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ("the LTTE" or "the Tigers") came to his store and demanded provisions at gunpoint. The applicant complied and was not harassed again until May, 1991. One day, he heard that the LTTE were again approaching food stores and he quickly closed his store to avoid confrontation. When leaving his store, he was approached by LTTE members. When he refused to voluntarily give them his key, he was beaten, the key was taken, and food was stolen. He was taken to an LTTE camp and detained for two weeks.
[5]
In September 1991, members of the LTTE came to the applicant's home and demanded gold. When the applicant was unable to pay by the end of the month, he was again taken to an LTTE camp. To secure his release, the applicant's wife was required to borrow money and bribe the LTTE. The applicant continued to suffer harassment by the LTTE after his release. Part of the applicant's work duties included the purchase of food which he transported from Vavuniya to Jaffna twice a month. On a number of occasions, he was stopped by the LTTE who took whatever they wanted.
[6]
In June 1992, the applicant and three other people were detained by the army and taken to the Sarvothayan camp. The applicant was held until October 1992 and beaten with fists and rifle butts. The applicant's employer was eventually able to convince the army that the applicant was not a LTTE supporter. As a condition of his release, however, the applicant was required to sign a document stating that he would not give food to the LTTE and agreed to inform the army if the LTTE made any demands of him.
[7]
Upon his release from the army camp, the applicant was afraid to return to Jaffna. He immediately travelled to Colombo, arriving there on November 2, 1992. The applicant stayed with a friend, but did not register with the police as required. After the death of a Sri Lankan naval officer in mid-November 1992, the police in Colombo began spot-checking Tamil lodges and hostels, searching for newly arrived Tamils from the North. The applicant's friend, wishing to avoid trouble, reported the applicant to the police. The applicant was subsequently arrested and held for five days. While in detention, the applicant was questioned as to his reason for coming to Colombo and his knowledge of LTTE activity. He testified that he was beaten during questioning.
[8]
After his release from the police, the applicant began making arrangements to leave Sri Lanka. Through the help of an agent, the applicant left his country on December 25, 1992. Shortly after arriving in the United States, the applicant made his way to Canada and declared his intention to seek refugee status.
The Board's Decision
[9]
The Board found that, based on the documentary evidence and the applicant's testimony, the applicant faced a reasonable chance of persecution by the LTTE if he was required to return to the north of Sri Lanka. However, the Board went on to conclude that the applicant was not a Convention refugee because he had an Internal Flight Alternative ("an IFA") to Colombo. In its reasons, the Board surveyed the documentary evidence which supported its finding that Colombo was a "safe haven" for Tamils. In assessing the applicant's experiences in Colombo, the Board stated:
"Although, according to the claimant, he was mistreated by the police while in custody, the panel does not consider that the action of the police constituted persecution. The Sri Lankan authorities have instituted certain security procedures in response to terrorist bombings and assassinations in Colombo carried out by the LTTE, and aimed at the protection of the population at large. The claimant testified that he had not registered and therefore had not followed the required procedures, and the panel therefore concludes that his detention was not persecution.
"Furthermore, the police released him after a few days. The panel concludes that they would not have done so if they suspected that he was a member or supporter of the LTTE.
"The panel accepts the documentary evidence that young Tamils from Jaffna, and particularly young Tamil males, may be at risk in Colombo, and that, for some Tamils, Colombo may not provide a reasonable internal flight alternative. Our task, however, is to determine whether there are good grounds for concluding that this particular claimant, would be persecuted for any of the Convention grounds if he were to return to Sri Lanka. For reasons set out above, the panel is of the opinion that there are none. The claimant is now 40 years old, and therefore does not fall into the category of 'young Tamil'.
"This appears to be confirmed by the fact that the claimant's company had convinced the authorities that he had nothing to do with the Tigers at the time he was detained in Vavuniya on suspicion of being a Tiger supporter. As a result, the claimant was permitted to go to Colombo. Furthermore, the claimant was released in Colombo without any conditions even though he had not registered with the police.
"In addition, the claimant testified that he had gone to Colombo to escape the problems in the north, clearly he understood Colombo to be an acceptable place to live as stated above, the panel considers that his experience with the army and police confirm that he is right. [sic]
"Furthermore, the claimant has a good friend, a long time resident of Colombo."
Issue
[10]
The main issue is whether the Board erred in finding that the applicant had an IFA. The applicant submits that the Board erred in law or made an erroneous finding of fact.
Analysis And Application To
The Case At Bar
(a) Notice And Natural Justice:
[11]
The applicant submitted that the Board breached a principle of natural justice because the Board did not advise the applicant that it would consider the possibility of an IFA. This claim is rejected out of hand. Even a cursory reading of the evidence makes it clear that counsel for the applicant knew the issues which had to be addressed. Indeed, this point was conceded by counsel in his argument before me.
(b) The IFA Test
[12]
Given that I cannot find an error of natural justice, I turn to the main issue for review: the finding of an  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Mahoney, J., set out the proper legal test to be applied in finding an IFA:
"In my opinion, in finding the IFA, the Board was required to be satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that there was no serious possibility of the appellant being persecuted in Colombo and that, in all the circumstances including circumstances particular to him, conditions in Colombo were such that it would not be unreasonable for the appellant to seek refuge there."
[13]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Federal Court of Appeal further elaborated on the IFA requirements:
"It is not a question of whether in normal times the refugee claimant would, on balance, choose to move to a different, safer part of the country after balancing the pros and cons of such a move to see if it is reasonable. Nor is it a matter of whether the other, safer part of the country is more or less appealing to the claimant than a new country. Rather, the question is whether, given the persecution in the claimant's part of the country, it is objectively reasonable to expect him or her to seek safety in a different part of that country before seeking a haven in Canada or elsewhere. Stated another way for clarity, the question to be answered is, would it be unduly harsh to expect this person, who is being persecuted in one part of his country, to move to another less hostile part of the country before seeking refugee status abroad?"
The Court of Appeal concluded:
"In conclusion, it is not a matter of a claimant's convenience or the attractiveness of the IFA, but whether one should be expected to make do in that location, before travelling halfway around the world to seek a safe haven, in another country. Thus, the objective standard of reasonableness which I have suggested for an IFA is the one that best conforms to the definition of Convention refugee. That definition requires claimants to be unable or unwilling by reason of fear of persecution to claim the protection of their home country in any part of that country. The prerequisites of that definition can only be met if it is not reasonable for the claimant to seek and obtain safety from persecution elsewhere in the country."
[14]
To find an IFA, the Board must be satisfied on a balance of probabilities that there was a part of the country where there would be no serious possibility of persecution. In addition, the Board must consider whether it would be reasonable in all the circumstances, including circumstances particular to the applicant, to seek and obtain safety from persecution there.
(c) No Serious Possibility Of Persecution In Colombo:
[15]
The applicant submits that there was contradictory evidence before the Board, documenting that Colombo was not a viable place to live for Tamils and the Board erred in not considering this evidence.
[16]
To find an IFA, the Board must find that there was a part of the country in which there was no serious possibility of persecution. Some of the documentary evidence before the Board revealed that Tamils from the north were considered suspect and were sometimes persecuted in Colombo. However, there was also documentary evidence before the Board which demonstrated that the human rights situation in Sri Lanka was improving and that Colombo was a viable IFA for some  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Heald, J., stated that although the Board is required to consider the totality of the evidence presented, it is not required to refer to each piece of evidence that was before it.
[17]
In the case at bar, I do not find that the Board erred in concluding that Colombo could be a viable IFA for Tamils. The Board had ample objective evidence before it to support such a conclusion and, although some evidence may be contradictory, it need not list all evidence in its reasons.
(c) Circumstances Particular To The Applicant:
[18]
The Board made a number of findings with respect to the circumstances particular to the applicant.
[19]
First, the Board found that the applicant's detention by the police was not persecutory because he had failed to register with the authorities. In fact, others who were detained were immediately released after showing their documentation. His arrest on this occasion was part of the security measures which were initiated in response to terrorist bombings and assassinations in Colombo and aimed at the protection of the population at large.
[20]
The applicant, however, points out that he was beaten while in detention. He claims this factor was ignored by the Board and relies on the decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, where Linden, J., found that beatings of suspects can never be justified. I believe that this case can be distinguished from the one at bar. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the applicant had been subjected to repeated arrests, long detention periods, beatings, and torture. In such an instance, "legitimate security measures" were considered by the Court of Appeal to be persecutory. In the case at bar, the applicant was detained for a few days. During his questioning, he was beaten. Although such police brutality is shameful and I would not, under any circumstances, condone such questioning methods, the applicant's treatment, according to the Board, is not persecutory. Although I may not agree, I cannot say that the Board made an erroneous finding of fact or erred in law in reaching this conclusion. As determined in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), persecution must be persistent or systemic. By extension, one beating is not necessarily persecutory.
[21]
Second, the Board concluded that the applicant was not and would not be a suspected member of the LTTE. The Board's conclusion rests on a number of findings: 1) the applicant was released from police custody after a few days and without any conditions, 2) even though he had not registered with the police;
he is not a "young Tamil"
(emphasis added); and 3) his company convinced the authorities that he had nothing to do with the Tigers at the time he was detained in Vavuniya on suspicion of being a Tiger supporter.
[22]
Although I agree with most of the Board's findings regarding the suspicion that the applicant would not be connected with the LTTE, I find that the Board erred in its summary conclusion that the applicant was not a "young Tamil". Throughout the course of the hearing, the Board accepted that the applicant was a young Tamil. Significantly, it did not alert the applicant that it considered him in any way but as a "young Tamil". To then turn around and simply assert that he is not a "young Tamil", when the applicant led no evidence to the contrary, misapprehends the evidence and is an error of law.
[23]
Moreover, even if the Board considered the applicant to be a young Tamil, the Board's perceptions are secondary to the perceptions of the LTTE or other persecutory agents. If the LTTE considered the applicant a "young Tamil", it is their opinion, and not that of the Board, which must govern.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 109 (F.C.A.) [see footnote 1], this point was made clear:
"In light of this conclusion, I do not need to deal with the allegation that the Board erred in its interpretation of 'political activities', other than to say that the
crucial test in this regard should not be whether the Board considers that the applicant engaged in political activities, but whether the ruling government of the country from which he claims to be a refugee considers his conduct to have been styled as political activity
." (Emphasis added)
Although the statements from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, were taken only in the context of political opinion, I think that the principle can be extended to other circumstances or attributes (like membership in a particular social group). Regardless of the ground of persecution, the question should be approached from the perspective of the persecutor.
[24]
In summary, the Board erred in concluding that the applicant was not a "young Tamil". In so doing, they misapprehended the evidence before them and erred in law.
[25]
Accordingly, this application for judicial review is referred back to a differently constituted Board. Furthermore, I recommend that the Board consider more recent reports regarding the treatments of Tamils and determine, having regard to the totality of the evidence, whether the applicant is a "young Tamil" and, indeed, whether such a finding even has bearing on the disposition of this case.
Application allowed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/blk
Footnote
1.	This test from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, was subsequently applied in a number of other decisions of the Federal Court: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[End of document]