[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: The applicant, Le Procureur Général du Canada, brings forward the present application "afin d'obtenir une ordonnance accordant l'émission d'un bref de certiorari annulant la décision de la Commission d'appel de l'immigration, datée du 19 ao&ucirc;t 1987, au motif que ladite décision est erronée, mal fondée et entachée d'une erreur de droit en ce que la Commission d'appel de l'immigration n'a pas le pouvoir d'ordonner le sursis de l'exécution de l'ordonnance de renvoi".
[2]
To the present application is attached the affidavit of Harry Langston, an agent of the Department of Immigration, Appeals Section, with one Exhibit, Pièce A, a decision dated August 18, 1987, issued by the Immigration Appeal Board.
[3]
The respondent filed an affidavit-in-reply dated September 17, 1987.
[4]
The facts do not seem to be in dispute. The respondent arrived in Canada on June 30, 1986. A s. 20(1) (of the Immigration Act 1976) report was made alleging that the respondent contravened s. 19(2)(d) of the Immigration Act 1976 (Act).
[5]
Section 20(1) of the Act states:
"20(1) Where an immigration officer is of the opinion that it would or may be contrary to this Act or the regulations to grant admission to or otherwise let a person examined by him come into Canada, he may detain or make an order to detain the person and shall
(a) subject to subsection (2), in writing report that person to a senior immigration officer; or
(b) allow that person to leave Canada forthwith."
[6]
Section 19(2)(d) of the Act states:
"19(2) No immigrant and, except as provided in subsection (3), no visitor shall be granted admission if he is a member of any of the following classes:
(d) persons who cannot or do not fulfil or comply with any of the conditions or requirements of this Act or the regulations or any orders or directions lawfully made or given under this Act or the regulations."
[7]
In virtue of the s. 20(1) report, an inquiry, on July 21, 1986, was commenced into the respondent's status and adjourned when, during this inquiry, the respondent claimed Convention refugee status (s. 45(1) of the Act).
"45(1) Where, at any time during an inquiry, the person who is the subject of the inquiry claims that he is a Convention refugee, the inquiry shall be continued and, if it is determined that, but for the person's claim that he is a Convention refugee, a removal order or a departure notice would be made or issued with respect to that person, the inquiry shall be adjourned and that person shall be examined under oath by a senior immigration officer respecting his claim."
[8]
As required by s. 45(1) of the Act, the respondent was examined under oath on September 16, 1986. On January 15, 1987, the respondent received the decision of the Minister of Employment and Immigration that he was not considered a Convention refugee. Because of this unfavourable decision, the respondent, on January 21, 1987, applied to the Immigration Appeal Board (I.A.B.) for a redetermination of his status as a refugee as per s. 70(1) of the Act.
[9]
On or about March 18, 1987, the respondent received a notice of hearing from the I.A.B. advising him that the hearing on his application for redetermination is scheduled to be heard on April 21, 1987, at Complexe Guy Favreau in Montreal, Quebec.
[10]
The respondent claims that upon receiving the notice of March 18, 1987, from the I.A.B. he called his "former" attorney to tell him the date of his hearing. Respondent was told by his "former" attorney that he would ask the I.A.B. for an adjournment of the hearing because of the possibility of an administrative review (paragraph 5, respondent's affidavit). The notice of hearing was brought to the office of respondent's "former" attorney on March 19, 1987. On April 16, 1987, the respondent was told by his "former" attorney that his case was to be heard in June, I assume in June 1987 (paragraph 7, respondent's affidavit). Because respondent was told his case was adjourned and that a new date had been set for his hearing (June) he did not present himself before the I.A.B. on April 21, 1987.
[11]
I am satisfied that any reasonable person should be able to rely on what he is told by his attorney in the present circumstances and that it was therefore reasonable for the respondent not to appear before the I.A.B. on April 21, 1987. It was reasonable for respondent to believe that his attorney would ensure that the hearing was adjourned. Much to respondent's surprise, on April 24, 1987, he received a letter from the I.A.B. stating that his application had been heard on April 21, 1987, and that the I.A.B. decided that he was not to be considered as a Convention refugee. This decision was made on April 21, 1987, the date of the scheduled hearing that the respondent believed to have been postponed (paragraph 10, Langston affidavit, paragraph 9, respondent's affidavit).
[12]
From April 24, 1987 to May 15, 1987, the respondent attempted to see his "former" attorney but was unable to do so. On May 15, 1987, he was told by his "former" attorney that he (the attorney) was going to verify his own adjournment book to understand what had happened. On May 27, 1987, the respondent was informed by a representative of the Department of Immigration, by telephone, that the inquiry that had commenced on July 21, 1986, would be resumed. The inquiry did in fact resume on July 4, 1987, but was immediately adjourned in that respondent's new attorney was absent. It was rescheduled for July 2, 1987, a date acceptable to respondent's new attorney.
[13]
It seems that respondent's "former" attorney was unable to give respondent "any reasonable answer" as to why the April 21, 1987, hearing had not been adjourned and on June 1, 1987, someone in respondent's "former" attorney's office told him his file was transferred to another attorney (respondent's present attorney).
[14]
The respondent, on June 30, 1987, presented to the Immigration Appeal Board a "motion to reopen" his case. He is asking for a new hearing, "requête pour demander une nouvelle audition pour le réexamen de la demande du requérant" (paragraph 13, Langston affidavit, paragraph 18, respondent's affidavit). On July 2, 1987, the inquiry was again adjourned but, this time, peremptorily to July 14, 1987. In that the inquiry was adjourned peremptorily to July 14, 1987, the respondent, on July 9, 1987, presented a "requête pour suspendre la reprise de l'enquête et pour abréger le délai de présentation", to the Trial Division of the Federal Court of Canada.
[15]
The hearing of this application was before Mr. Justice Pinard on July 13, 1987 who, after hearing the parties, refused to issue a writ of prohibition. The inquiry of respondent was thus continued and resulted in an order of expulsion being issued.
[16]
Soon after the issuance of the expulsion order, the respondent was notified, by letter, that he should report at Mirabel Airport on August 21, 1987, in order to leave Canada.
[17]
Respondent, on July 15, 1987, presented a motion to extend the delay to present a motion under s. 28 of the Federal Court Act for the annulment of the Immigration Appeal Board's decision of April 24, 1987. To my knowledge, this motion to extend the delay submitted by the respondent has, as yet, not been heard by the Federal Court of Appeal.
[18]
The I.A.B. held a hearing on the respondent's "requête pour demander une nouvelle audition pour le réexamen de la demande du requérant" made on June 30, 1987, on the 18th day of August 1987 and decided the following:
[Original]
"The 18th day of August, 1987.
J.P. Cardinal
Presiding Member
D. Angé
Member
E.A. Brown
Member
Jonas Kwane Oti Nkrumah,
Applicant
The Minister of Employment and Immigration,
Respondent
Upon motion filed on the 30th day of June 1987, and having come on for hearing on the 18th day of August 1987;
This Board Orders that the said motion be and the same is hereby referred to the original panel seized with the application for redetermination and adjourned to a date to be fixed by the Registrar;
And Further Orders the respondent not to deport the applicant before the said motion is disposed of.
Signed this 19th day of August, 1987.
Sgd. 'G. Palasse'
Registrar"
[19]
Respondent is still waiting (on September 21, 1987), for the hearing on his motion before the original panel of the I.A.B.
[20]
The present application by the Attorney General of Canada only refers to the Immigration Appeal Board's order "not to deport the applicant before the said motion is disposed of".
[21]
The issue in the present case is to determine whether the I.A.B. has the jurisdiction to make an interim order not to deport an individual who is under an order of expulsion until such time as the I.A.B. hears and decides on a motion for a new hearing to reexamine the respondent's request for redetermination of his claim to Convention refugee status.
[22]
The Attorney General of Canada does not allege that the I.A.B. cannot decide to reopen the hearing into the question.
[23]
I am satisfied that the order of expulsion pronounced by a senior immigration officer after the completion of the inquiry into the respondent's status on July 14, 1987 is valid. In paragraph 22 of the respondent's affidavit, he speaks of the order being issued on July 14, 1986. I am making the assumption that this is a typing error.
[24]
As I have stated, the inquiry continued on July 14, 1987. The respondent attempted to obtain a writ of prohibition to prevent his inquiry from continuing. Mr. Justice Pinard on July 13, 1987, refused to issue the writ of prohibition stating:
"Considérant les affidavits et les autres documents au dossier; considérant les arguments présentés par les procureurs des parties; considérant la nature particulière du présent cas; considérant que le requérant a fait défaut d'établir un traitement inéquitable; considérant en outre que le requérant a fait défaut d'établir que quelque droit ou liberté garanti par la Charte en sa faveur a été ind&ucirc;ment affecté;
"La requête est rejetée, sans frais."
[25]
The Immigration Appeal Board (I.A.B.) came into existence as a result of a statute of the Parliament of Canada. The I.A.B. was created by s. 59 of the Immigration Act of Canada 1976 (Act).
"59(1) There is hereby established a board, to be called the Immigration Appeal Board, that shall, in respect of appeals made pursuant to sections 72, 73 and 79 and in respect of applications for redetermination made pursuant to section 70, have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine all questions of law and fact, including questions of jurisdiction, that may arise in relation to the making of a removal order or the refusal to approve an application for landing made by a member of the family class.
"59(2) The Board shall consist of not fewer than seven and not more than fifty members to be appointed by the Governor-in-Council.
"59(3) Notwithstanding subsections 60(1) and (2) but subject to subsection (4), not more than eighteen members may be appointed for terms exceeding two years and a member appointed for a term not exceeding two years is only eligible for reappointment for one term not exceeding two years.
"59(4) A member appointed for a term not exceeding two years is eligible for reappointment for one or more terms exceeding two years if fewer than eighteen members are serving terms exceeding two years."
[26]
In the present instance, an application pursuant to s. 70 of the Act was made by the respondent, it was denied and a motion to reopen the hearing is presently pending before the Board.
"70(1) A person who claims to be a Convention refugee and has been informed in writing by the Minister pursuant to subsection 45(5) that he is not a Convention refugee may, within such period of time as is prescribed, make an application to the Board for a redetermination of his claim that he is a Convention refugee.
"70(2) Where an application is made to the Board pursuant to subsection (1), the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the transcript of the examination under oath referred to in subsection 45(1) and shall contain or be accompanied by a declaration of the applicant under oath setting out
(a) the nature of the basis of the application;
(b) a statement in reasonable detail of the facts on which the application is based;
(c) a summary in reasonable detail of the information and evidence intended to be offered at the hearing; and
(d) such other representations as the applicant deems relevant to the application."
[27]
In that the I.A.B. was created by statute, it has no inherent jurisdiction. It only has those powers specifically granted to it by the statute that created the I.A.B., that is, the Immigration Act of Canada 1976.
[28]
Although it was the old law of immigration that was in effect at the time, the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  is applicable. Mr. Justice Pigeon at page 592 states:
"La première question que soulève le pourvoi est de savoir si, après avoir délivré une ordonnance écrite de rejet d'appel et d'expulsion, la Commission avait le pouvoir de reprendre l'audition de l'appel de l'appelant.
"A mon avis, il ne faut pas aborder cette question en se fondant sur les principes applicables aux tribunaux qui ont des pouvoirs inhérents.
La Commission d'appel de l'immigration n'a qu'une compétence statutaire limitée
. Une partie bien définie des pouvoirs administratifs du gouvernement lui a été confiée, mais non pas l'ensemble de ces pouvoirs en matière d'immigration. On ne saurait donc prétendre qu'il devrait y avoir un remède possible quand la loi n'en prévoit aucun de façon explicite. Si telle était la situation, il faudrait conclure que la question reste du domaine du pouvoir discrétionnaire de l'autorité ministérielle compétente." (Underlining is mine)
[29]
The same principle was enunciated in the cases of Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . These two cases involve police commissions in the Province of Quebec and the powers of such administrative tribunals.
[30]
In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Dubé, in speaking of the Immigration Appeal Board states at page 4 [of the reasons for judgment]:
"
Il faut retenir que la Commission est un organisme statutaire qui ne peut exercer que les compétences spécifiquement déterminées dans sa loi constitutive
. La Commission n'a aucune juridiction pour proroger le délai du dép&ocirc;t d'une demande de réexamen (
Holocek
, A-382-75, 9 juin 1975;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Même la
Charte canadienne des droits et libertés
invoquée par le procureur ne saurait avoir pour effet de donner cette compétence à la Commission." (Underlining is mine)
[31]
Although the respondent did not make the submission that the I.A.B. has any powers other than what is given to it by the statute that created the Board, respondent believes that the I.A.B. has the powers of a Superior Court in virtue of s. 65(2) of the Act and thus can issue an interim order to stop the deportation of the respondent.
[32]
Section 65(2) states:
"65(2) The Board has, as regards the attendance, swearing and examination of witnesses, the production and inspection of documents, the enforcement of its orders and other matters necessary or proper for the due exercise of its jurisdiction, all such powers, rights and privileges as are vested in a superior court of record and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, may
(a) issue a summons to any person requiring him to appear at the time and place mentioned therein to testify to all matters within his knowledge relative to a subject matter before the Board and to bring with him and produce any document, book or paper that he has in his possession or under his control relative to such subject matter;
(b) administer oaths and examine any person on oath; and
(c) during a hearing, receive such additional evidence as it may consider credible or trustworthy and necessary for dealing with the subject matter before it."
[33]
Insofar as s. 65(2) of the Act is concerned, I am satisfied that this section of the Act only applies with regard to the procedure that is to be followed by the I.A.B. The I.A.B. has all such powers, rights and privileges as are vested in a Superior Court of record in doing what is mentioned in this section, for example, to issue a summons to any person, it does not give the I.A.B. other jurisdiction or power, right or privilege on matters not mentioned in the section.
[34]
Respondent submits the case of Areti Tsantili (Iliopoulos), [1974] I.A.C. 80, for the principle that the I.A.B. has the jurisdiction to reopen a hearing. This case must first be distinguished from the present case in that the Tsantili case involves a motion to reopen the hearing
of an appeal
against an order of deportation while the matter before the I.A.B. in the present case is a request to reopen a hearing for redetermination of a claim concerning Convention refugee status. In the present case there is no question of an appeal.
[35]
I am satisfied that the I.A.B. has the jurisdiction to reopen a hearing whether on a question of appeal under s. 72 or 73 of the Act or whether it is a matter under s. 70 of the Act. This is so,
not because of an inherent jurisdiction
to do so but because of a
continuing jurisdiction
to allow the reopening of a hearing under very special circumstances.
[36]
It does not follow that because the I.A.B. may be allowed to reconsider its decisions
in certain special cases
, it has the jurisdiction to order the suspension of a valid order of deportation in matters involving the redetermination of a claim of refugee status.
[37]
The jurisdiction to issue a deportation order is given by the Act to the Minister, not to the I.A.B. The I.A.B. has no jurisdiction over such orders. The I.A.B. can only suspend a deportation order in virtue of s. 75(1)(c) of the Act when there is an appeal to the Board in virtue of s. 72(1)(b) or s. 72(2)(d).
"75(1) The Board may dispose of an appeal made pursuant to section 72
(c) in the case of an appeal pursuant to paragraph 72(1)(b) or 72(2)(d), by directing that execution of the removal order be stayed.
"72(1) Subject to subsection (3), where a removal order is made against a permanent resident or against a person lawfully in possession of a valid returning resident permit issued to him pursuant to the regulations, that person may appeal to the Board on either or both of the following grounds, namely,
(b) on the ground that, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the person should not be removed from Canada.
"72(2) Where a removal order is made against a person who
(d) on the ground that, having regard to the existence of compassionate or humanitarian considerations, the person should not be removed from Canada."
[38]
The case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-476-86, F.C.A., January 22, 1987, only stands for the principle that the I.A.B. may, when a question of natural justice is involved, allow for the reopening of a hearing in order to enable an applicant to be heard. It does not go any further. It does not infer that as a result of having
a continuing jurisdiction
in a matter after a decision has been made, it can also order the suspension of a valid order of expulsion which was never an issue before it.
[39]
Mr. Justice MacGuigan states at page 5 [of the reasons for judgment]:
"Clearly, a tribunal's power of rehearing is to be implied in such circumstances. It accordingly appears to us that the Immigration Act, 1976 must be interpreted to allow reconsideration by the Board of its decisions, at least where it subsequently recognizes that it has failed in natural justice."
[40]
Counsel for respondent submits the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-314-85, F.C.A., June 7, 1985, as stating the principle that if the Federal Court of Appeal is the only court to which a s. 28 application can be made and that it therefore has jurisdiction in certain matters by implication, that is, the Federal Court of Appeal has the power to stay the execution of decisions which it is asked to review, then the I.A.B., by implication, can stay the execution of the deportation order until such time as it decides on the respondent's application presently before it as the I.A.B. is the only body that can decide the motion.
[41]
Mr. Justice Stone, at page 14 [of the reasons for judgment], quotes Mr. Justice Pratte in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , rendered on April 19, 1984 (Court File A-1690-83), at page 2 [of the reasons for judgment]:
"What I have just said should not be taken to mean that the Court of Appeal has, with respect to decisions of federal tribunals which are the subject of applications to set aside under s. 28, the same power to order stays of execution as the Trial Division with respect to decisions of the court.
"The only powers which the court has regarding decisions which are the subject of applications to set aside under s. 28 are those conferred on it by ss. 28 and 52(d) of the Federal Court Act. It is clear that those provisions do not expressly confer on the court a power to stay the execution of decisions which it is asked to review. However, it could be argued that Parliament has conferred this power on the court by implication, insofar as the existence and exercise of the power are necessary for the court to fully exercise the jurisdiction expressly conferred on it by s. 28. In my opinion, this is the only possible source of any power the Court of Appeal may have to order a stay in the execution of a decision which is the subject of an appeal under s. 28. It follows logically that, if the court can order a stay in the execution of such decisions, it can only do so in the rare cases in which the exercise of this power is necessary to allow it to exercise the jurisdiction conferred on it by s. 28."
[42]
With respect for this submission, I cannot agree that by implication the I.A.B. acquired the jurisdiction to stay the execution of a valid order of deportation while it considers whether or not to reopen a hearing upon a motion made by the respondent. I am satisfied that the I.A.B. cannot acquire any jurisdiction by implication. It can only have jurisdiction over matters given to it by the statute creating the Board.
[43]
There is nowhere to be found any implied or inherent jurisdiction in a federal government administrative tribunal such as the I.A.B. Its jurisdiction is only what is given to it.
[44]
The I.A.B. only has to decide, in the present case, whether or not it will allow respondent's hearing to be reopened. The issue of the deportation is not before it to decide. It therefore cannot assume that it has the jurisdiction to prevent the execution of the order of deportation.
[45]
The present application is allowed and the order of the Immigration Appeal Board dated August 18, 1987, not to deport Jonas Kwane Oti Nkrumah is set aside without costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/nmg