 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 415)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Noël, J.
May 2, 2014.
Counsel:
Nilufar Sadeghi, for the applicant;
Simone Truong, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Allen & Associates, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Noël, J.
: This is an application for judicial review under subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA] of a decision rendered on May 27, 2013 by Edward Aronoff of the Refugee Protection Division [the RPD] finding that the Applicant is neither a refugee within the meaning of section 96 of the IRPA nor a person in need of protection under subsection 97(1) of the IRPA.
II.
Facts
[2]
The Applicant is a citizen of Bangladesh who fled his home country on March 11, 2010 and claimed refugee protection on March 26, 2010.
[3]
The hearing before the RPD was held on April 9, 2013. At the hearing, the Applicant made the following allegations and based his claims on his political opinion and his membership in a particular social group, as he became an active member of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party [the BNP] in 2004, at the age of 18 years. Between 2004 and 2010, he has taken part in a series of activities and events as a member of the BNP, first while the BNP was in power (up to 2006), then through a caretaker government (from 2006 to 2008), as well as during the coming to power of the then opposition party, the Awami League [the AL] (from 2008 to his departure from Bangladesh in 2010). The Applicant argued that he was targeted, detained and tortured by goons of the AL and that the police provided no assistance when he reached out for help. After the goons came to his house, in his absence, vowing to kill him, the Applicant hid in his friend's house until he was able to leave Bangladesh in March 2010. The Applicant claimed being a refugee under section 96 of the IRPA because he has a well-founded fear of being persecuted by the AL government currently in place on the basis of his political opinion.
III.
Decision under review
[4]
The RPD was satisfied as to the identity of the Applicant but nonetheless rejected his claims finding that he lacked credibility and plausibility regarding determinative issues and because an internal flight alternative [IFA] was available to him in his home country.
[5]
The RPD first analyzed the issue of exclusion for reasons of complicity under article 1F(
c
) of the Convention raised by the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness. The RPD ultimately found that the Applicant was not complicit of the crimes possibly committed by the BNP mainly because the Applicant held within the organization a low-ranking position. The RPD inferred from the Applicant's position that he had no knowledge of or involvement in any acts perpetrated by his party that are contrary to the principles and purposes of the United Nations.
[6]
Then, the RPD held that the Applicant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution as it was not plausible that his life was being threatened and not that of the president or of the general secretary of the BNP. Also, he was not able to explain why the police would be seeking to arrest him specifically. The RPD also rejected several exhibits, considering them to be speculation or fraudulently obtained. In the end, the RPD was of the opinion that the Applicant's evidence regarding his alleged well-founded fear of persecution was a fabrication.
[7]
The RPD also concluded that the Applicant could avail himself of an IFA in his home country. According to documentary evidence, people who were politically active at a very local level would only be at risk in their own region, and considering the particular circumstances of the Applicant, it was held that it would not be objectively unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to move elsewhere in Bangladesh prior to claiming refugee status in Canada.
[8]
The RPD held that, on a balance of probabilities, there was no reasonable chance or serious possibility that the Applicant would be persecuted, or that, on a balance of probabilities, more likely than not, the claimant would not be personally subjected to a risk to his life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, should he return to Bangladesh.
IV.
Applicant's submissions
[9]
The Applicant claims that the RPD's decision is unreasonable and he takes issue with both findings (the Applicant's lack of credibility and the existence of a viable IFA).
[10]
With respect to his credibility, the Applicant submits that the RPD erred in assessing his testimony and the evidence. Particularly, the Applicant argues that he was never questioned on the issue of why the authorities in his home country were seeking him out and not the president or the general secretary of the BNP. As he was not given an opportunity to explain, it was unreasonable for the RPD to conclude that his explanations were insufficient. In addition, the Applicant claims that he has testified on multiple occasions as to why the police would try to arrest him for creating agitation and unrest, and his testimony was in line with the content of his Personal Information Form. His testimony is presumed truthful and the RPD should have explained why it did not consider it credible in this regard. The RPD also failed to take into consideration certain documentary evidence from the National Documentary Package as it concerns the extremely broad powers the Bangladesh authorities have under the country's
Special Powers Act
. Also, it was unreasonable for the RPD to reject evidence submitted by the Applicant as fraudulent simply based on the fact that according to documentary evidence some court and police documents emanating from this country are fraudulent. Also, the RPD should have given justification for rejection of uncontradicted statements.
[11]
As it concerns the existence of an IFA, the Applicant claims that as soon as he would move, the authorities would perform a background verification on him and he would be brought to justice. Moreover, it is important for him to pursue his political activities and he claims that it is unreasonable for him to be prevented from doing so.
V.
Respondent's submissions
[12]
The Respondent claims that the RPD's decision is reasonable. The RPD's findings with respect to the Applicant's credibility fall within its expertise. On the issue of the testimony, the RPD found that the Applicant's political implication was on the low end of the spectrum and its findings were based
inter alia
on rationality and common sense. As for the evidence, the RPD was entitled to base its rejection on the fact that according to documentary evidence certain documents can be fraudulently obtained because it had already concluded that other evidence and the Applicant himself were not credible. More specifically, regarding the documentary evidence in the National Documentary Package related to the authorities' powers in Bangladesh, given that the RPD did not believe that the Applicant was being sought for by the authorities for political reasons, there was no reason for it to consult such documentary evidence.
[13]
Lastly, the Applicant was questioned regarding the possibility of moving elsewhere in Bangladesh and he claimed that this would require money and possibly entail difficulties in finding a job. This is pure speculation, and the Applicant did not prove that the authorities would be looking for him should he prevail himself of an existing IFA. And as for the Applicant's argument that he wishes to pursue his political activities, the Respondent submits that it was he, the Applicant himself, who decided to move to Canada and he has failed to prove that he has continued his activities from here.
VI.
Issues
[14]
This application for judicial review raises two issues to be dealt with by this Court:
1. Did the RPD err when it concluded that a viable IFA was available to the Applicant in Bangladesh?
2. Did the RPD err when it concluded that the Applicant was not credible?
VII.
Standard of review
[15]
The RPD's credibility findings and the appreciation of the evidence are to be reviewed under the standard of reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). The same standard is applicable to RPD's IFA determinations ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 47).
VIII.
Analysis
[16]
For the reasons outlined below, the RPD's decision is reasonable overall and does not warrant the intervention of this Court. The finding regarding the possible IFA in Bangladesh is reasonable and, notwithstanding the somewhat weaker finding with respect to credibility, it settles the entire judicial review application.
1.
Did the RPD err when it concluded that a viable IFA was available to the Applicant in Bangladesh?
[17]
A two-step test has been established by the Federal Court of Appeal to determine whether an IFA exists or not. First, the RPD must be satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that there is no serious possibility of the Applicant being persecuted in the proposed IFA, and second, the conditions in that part of the country must be such that it would not be unreasonable, in all the circumstances, for the Applicant to seek refuge there (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 139 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA)).
[18]
This Court is satisfied that the RPD undertook an adequate analysis of the IFA. Based on a review of the documentary evidence, the RPD considered that the Applicant, who was politically active only at a very low level, more specifically in the Sutarpara Union, would only be at risk in this particular union and that he could be expected to seek refuge elsewhere in the country. It also considered that in all circumstances it was not unreasonable for him to move. Indeed, the Applicant is young and has no dependents. The Applicant had the burden of establishing that it was objectively unreasonable to request from him that he seeks refuge in another part of the country, and the "objectively unreasonable" standard is very high and requires the proof of adverse conditions which would jeopardize the life and safety of the Applicant in relocating to a safe area. The record shows that political activists in Bangladesh were generally able to relocate internally away from the area where they are at risk (see Tribunal's Record, at page 14). What is more, the evidence of such conditions had to be actual and concrete (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA)).
[19]
The Applicant argues that if he were to go back, he would have the right to participate politically and, consequently, that he would be seriously at risk. The problem with this argument is that the Applicant decided to leave his country rather than to relocate elsewhere and be actively involved. Furthermore, the Applicant has not filed any evidence to support this argument or any evidence to show that he has remained politically involved while in Canada. Therefore, this argument has to be rejected. As a result, the Applicant, who did not produce any sufficient evidence in support of his claims, failed to satisfy this Court that the proposed IFA is unreasonable and that the RPD committed an error in this regard which warrants the intervention of this Court.
[20]
Considering that an IFA is available to the Applicant, he cannot be considered a refugee or a person in need of protection and, by way of consequence, his claim was reasonably dismissed.
2.
Did the RPD err when it concluded that the Applicant was not credible?
[21]
As indicated above, the first issue settles the entire judicial review application; however, I will briefly address the RPD's credibility finding to the sake of completeness.
[22]
The RPD rejected the Applicant's credibility based on a number of findings. One of them is that the Applicant could not explain why he would be sought for by the authorities when the president and the general secretary of the BNP were not. The Applicant claims that he was never given an opportunity to address this issue. However, the Applicant was in fact questioned extensively on this issue before the RPD. After talking about the Applicant's allegations that the authorities were looking for him, the presiding member of the RPD hearing asked "So why is the President still alive? [...] So why are they [the president and general secretary] still carrying on their lives normally?" (See hearing transcript, Certified Tribunal Record, at pages 264-265.) The Applicant simply did not provide an answer that satisfied the RPD.
[23]
Another finding which led to the RPD rejecting the Applicant's credibility is that he could not explain why the police would try to arrest him for creating agitation and unrest. However, I find that the Applicant did produce sufficient evidence to explain why he could be considered as creating agitation and unrest. In fact, he explained on several occasions that he protested and inspired others to do so and that he expressly spoke out against a family member of a member of the AL government in power.
[24]
Thus, the assessment of Applicant's credibility is not as clear as the RPD likes to suggest. And, for that reason, I find that the RPD should have taken a closer look at the pieces of evidence before rejecting them on the basis that they are fraudulent. In this case, simply relying on documentary evidence to the effect that official documents can be fraudulently obtained in Bangladesh does not suffice. On this issue, this Court previously held as follows in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2004] FCJ No 255:
[7] The documents may well be forgeries, however evidence of widespread forgery in a country is not, by itself, sufficient to reject foreign documents as forgeries. As the Respondent noted evidence of widespread forgery merely demonstrates that false documentation could be available to the Applicant.
[8]  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Heneghan J. observed at paragraphs 4-5:
The applicant argues, among other things, that the Board erred in law by rejecting an official document in the absence of evidence to support its conclusions as to its invalidity. The applicant here relies on the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (January 8, 1998), Doc. IMM-1298-97 (Fed.T.D.) where the Court said at paragraph 6, as follows:
In this instance, the Board challenged the validity of the birth certificate without adducing any evidence in support of its contention and, clearly, the matter of foreign documents is not an area where the Board can claim particular knowledge. That, in my view, constitutes a reviewable error on the part of the Board.
In the present case, the Board purported to rely on evidence that the forging of official documents was widespread in Albania. Although there is a footnote referring to such evidence in the reasons, the Tribunal record does not contain any evidence in support of this conclusion by the Board. Furthermore, the record discloses no evidence that the Board has particular knowledge or expertise in the validity of documents emanating from Albania
[25]
Consequently, the RPD's finding regarding the credibility of the documentation could have been better explained. That being said, when considering the decision as a whole, and more specifically the finding that the Applicant was a low-level member of the BNP and the finding related to the fact that the Applicant would be a target whereas the president and general secretary are not despite remaining active, these two findings suffice to give the decision on the issue of the credibility a passing mark on reasonableness. In any event, as seen above, the IFA finding is wholly reasonable.
[26]
The parties were invited to submit questions for certification, but none were proposed.
ORDER
[27]
THIS COURT ORDERS that
this application for judicial review is dismissed. No question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Noël
[Traduction]: Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la LIPR), à l'encontre de la décision rendue le 27 mai 2013 par le commissaire Edward Aronoff de la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR), qui a conclu que le demandeur n'était ni un réfugié au sens de l'article 96 de la LIPR ni une personne à protéger au sens du paragraphe 97(1) de cette loi.
II.
Les faits
[2]
Le demandeur, citoyen du Bangladesh, a fui son pays le 11 mars 2010 et a présenté une demande d'asile le 26 mars 2010.
[3]
La SPR l'a entendu le 9 avril 2013. À l'audience, le demandeur a formulé les allégations suivantes et fondé sa demande sur ses opinions politiques et son appartenance à un groupe social, car il était devenu membre actif du Parti nationaliste du Bangladesh (le PNB) en 2004, à l'âge de 18 ans. Entre 2004 et 2010, il a pris part à une série d'activités et d'événements à titre de membre du PNB, tout d'abord à l'époque où ce parti était au pouvoir (jusqu'en 2006), ensuite dans le cadre d'un gouvernement intérimaire (de 2006 à 2008), ainsi que pendant la période au pouvoir du parti d'opposition de l'époque, la Ligue Awami (la LA) (de 2008 à son départ du Bangladesh en 2010). Le demandeur a fait valoir qu'il était la cible d'hommes de main de la LA, qu'il avait été détenu et torturé et que la police ne lui avait offert aucune aide lorsqu'il l'avait demandée. Après que les hommes de main furent venus chez lui en son absence, jurant de le tuer, le demandeur s'est caché chez un ami jusqu'à ce qu'il puisse quitter le Bangladesh en mars 2010. Il a prétendu être un réfugié au sens de l'article 96 de la LIPR, craignant avec raison d'être persécuté par le gouvernement de la LA actuellement en place, du fait de ses opinions politiques.
III.
La décision faisant l'objet du contrôle
[4]
La SPR a vérifié l'identité du demandeur, mais a néanmoins rejeté sa demande, concluant qu'il manquait de crédibilité et de vraisemblance quant aux questions déterminantes et parce qu'il disposait, dans son pays d'origine, d'une possibilité de refuge intérieur (PRI).
[5]
La SPR a d'abord étudié la question de l'exclusion pour complicité aux termes de l'alinéa
c
) de la section F de l'article premier de la Convention soulevée par le ministre de la Sécurité publique et de la Protection civile. La SPR a finalement conclu que le demandeur n'était pas complice de crimes qu'avait peut-être commis le PNB, surtout parce que le poste qu'il occupait dans l'organisation était au bas de la hiérarchie. La SPR a conclu, d'après le poste qu'occupait le demandeur, qu'il n'avait pas participé aux actes perpétrés par son parti et contraires aux principes ainsi qu'aux fins évoquées par les Nations Unies et qu'il n'en avait pas eu connaissance.
[6]
Ensuite, la SPR a soutenu que le demandeur n'avait pas raison de craindre d'être persécuté, puisqu'il n'était pas vraisemblable que sa vie soit menacée, et non pas celle du président ou du secrétaire général du PNB. De plus, il n'a pas expliqué pour quelle raison la police voudrait l'arrêter, lui en particulier. La SPR a également rejeté plusieurs pièces qu'elle considérait comme des conjectures ou des documents obtenus de façon frauduleuse. Finalement, la SPR était d'avis que les éléments de preuve produits par le demandeur pour établir qu'il craignait avec raison d'être persécuté avaient été inventés.
[7]
La SPR a aussi conclu que le demandeur avait une PRI dans son pays d'origine. Selon la preuve documentaire, les personnes actives sur le plan politique à un niveau très local ne courraient de risque que dans leur propre région, et, compte tenu de la situation particulière du demandeur, le tribunal a conclu qu'il ne serait pas objectivement déraisonnable ou excessivement sévère de s'attendre à ce qu'il déménage ailleurs au Bangladesh avant de demander l'asile au Canada.
[8]
La SPR a conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, il n'y avait pas de risque raisonnable ou de possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur soit persécuté, ou que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, plus probablement que le contraire, le demandeur ne serait pas personnellement exposé à une menace à sa vie ou à un risque de traitement ou peine cruels et inusités s'il retournait au Bangladesh.
IV.
Les observations du demandeur
[9]
Le demandeur prétend que la décision de la SPR est déraisonnable et il s'oppose aux deux conclusions (le manque de crédibilité du demandeur et l'existence d'une PRI viable).
[10]
En ce qui a trait à sa crédibilité, il soutient que la SPR a commis une erreur en appréciant son témoignage et la preuve. Plus précisément, il fait valoir qu'on ne lui a jamais posé de questions à savoir pour quelle raison les autorités de son pays le recherchaient, et non le président ou le secrétaire général du PNB. Puisqu'il n'a eu aucune possibilité de s'expliquer, il était déraisonnable que la SPR conclue à l'insuffisance de ses explications. De plus, il prétend qu'il a précisé à de multiples reprises, dans son témoignage, pour quelles raisons la police essaierait de l'arrêter pour agitation politique et que son témoignage était conforme au contenu de son Formulaire de renseignements personnels. Son témoignage est présumé véridique, et la SPR aurait dû expliquer pour quelle raison elle l'avait considéré non crédible à cet égard. De plus, la SPR a omis de prendre en considération certains éléments de preuve du Cartable national de documentation concernant les pouvoirs extrêmement vastes des autorités du Bangladesh en vertu de la loi nationale sur les pouvoirs spéciaux (
Special Powers Act
). De plus, il n'était pas raisonnable pour la SPR de rejeter les éléments de preuve présentés par le demandeur en les considérant comme frauduleux simplement parce que, selon la preuve documentaire, certains documents des tribunaux et de la police émanant de son pays sont frauduleux. De plus, la SPR devrait avoir donné une justification du rejet des déclarations non contestées.
[11]
En ce qui a trait à l'existence d'une PRI, le demandeur prétend que, dès qu'il déménagerait, les autorités effectueraient une vérification de ses antécédents et qu'il serait traduit en justice. De plus, il est important pour lui de poursuivre ses activités politiques, et il prétend qu'il est déraisonnable de l'empêcher de le faire.
V.
Les observations du défendeur
[12]
Le défendeur estime que la décision de la SPR est raisonnable. Les conclusions tirées par la SPR sur la crédibilité du demandeur relèvent de son expertise. Sur la question du témoignage, la SPR a conclu que le rôle politique du demandeur se situait au bas de l'échelle et ses conclusions reposaient notamment sur la logique et le bon sens. En ce qui a trait aux éléments de preuve, la SPR avait le pouvoir de fonder son rejet sur le fait que, selon la preuve documentaire, certains documents avaient pu être obtenus de façon frauduleuse, parce qu'elle avait déjà conclu que d'autres éléments de preuve, et le demandeur même, n'étaient pas crédibles. Plus particulièrement, en ce qui a trait aux éléments de preuve documentaire du Cartable national de documentation concernant les pouvoirs des autorités au Bangladesh, étant donné que la SPR ne croyait pas que le demandeur était recherché par les autorités pour des motifs politiques, elle n'avait aucune raison de consulter cette preuve documentaire.
[13]
Enfin, la SPR a posé au demandeur des questions sur sa possibilité de déménager ailleurs au Bangladesh, et il a affirmé qu'il lui faudrait de l'argent pour cela et qu'il aurait peut-être de la difficulté à trouver un emploi. Il s'agit de pures conjectures, et le demandeur n'a pas prouvé que les autorités seraient à sa recherche s'il se prévalait d'une PRI actuelle. De plus, en ce qui a trait à l'argument du demandeur selon lequel il désire poursuivre ses activités politiques, le défendeur soutient que c'est le demandeur même qui a décidé de déménager au Canada et que celui-ci n'a pu prouver qu'il avait poursuivi ses activités à partir d'ici.
VI.
Les questions en litige
[14]
La demande de contrôle judiciaire soulève deux questions que doit trancher la Cour:
1. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant qu'il existait une PRI viable pour le demandeur au Bangladesh?
2. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que le demandeur n'était pas crédible?
VII.
La norme de contrôle
[15]
Les conclusions de la SPR quant à la crédibilité et son appréciation de la preuve doivent être contrôlées selon la norme de la décision raisonnable ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), au paragraphe 47). La même norme s'applique aux conclusions de la SPR concernant la PRI ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47).
VIII.
Analyse
[16]
Pour les motifs énoncés ci-après, la décision de la SPR est raisonnable dans l'ensemble et ne justifie pas l'intervention de la Cour. La conclusion concernant la possibilité de refuge intérieur au Bangladesh est raisonnable, et, malgré la conclusion légèrement moins solide en matière de crédibilité, cela règle en totalité la demande de contrôle judiciaire.
1.
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant qu'il existait une PRI viable pour le demandeur au Bangladesh
?
[17]
La Cour d'appel fédérale a établi un critère en deux étapes pour déterminer s'il y a ou non une PRI. Tout d'abord, la SPR doit pouvoir conclure, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, qu'il n'existe pas de risque sérieux que le demandeur soit persécuté dans la PRI envisagée et, de plus, la situation dans la partie du pays envisagée doit être telle qu'il ne serait pas déraisonnable pour le demandeur d'y chercher refuge, compte tenu de toutes les circonstances (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 139 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF)).
[18]
La Cour est convaincue que la SPR a mené une analyse adéquate de la PRI. D'après une étude de la preuve documentaire, la SPR a tenu compte du fait que le demandeur, qui n'était politiquement actif qu'à un échelon très bas, plus particulièrement dans l'union Sutarpara, ne courrait de risque que dans cette union en particulier et qu'on pouvait s'attendre à ce qu'il cherche refuge ailleurs dans le pays. Elle a également considéré que, dans toutes les circonstances, il n'était pas déraisonnable qu'il déménage. En fait, le demandeur est jeune et n'a aucune personne à charge. Il lui incombe d'établir qu'il était objectivement déraisonnable de lui demander de chercher refuge dans une autre région du pays, et la norme de l'« objectivement déraisonnable » est très élevée et exige la preuve de conditions défavorables mettant en péril la vie et la sécurité du demandeur qui déménagerait dans une région sûre. Il ressort du dossier que les activistes politiques au Bangladesh sont généralement capables de quitter la zone où ils courent un risque et de déménager ailleurs dans le pays (voir le dossier du tribunal, à la page 14). De plus, il faut une preuve réelle et concrète de l'existence de telles conditions ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), au paragraphe 15).
[19]
Le demandeur fait valoir que, s'il devait retourner, il aurait le droit de participer à la vie politique et, par conséquent, il courrait un risque grave. La difficulté de cet argument est que le demandeur a décidé de quitter son pays, plutôt que de déménager ailleurs à l'intérieur du territoire et de s'impliquer activement. Qui plus est, le demandeur n'a produit aucun élément de preuve appuyant son argumentation ou indiquant qu'il était demeuré politiquement actif pendant son séjour au Canada. Par conséquent, l'argument doit être rejeté. Ainsi, le demandeur, qui n'a pas produit le moindre élément de preuve suffisant pour appuyer ses allégations, n'a pu convaincre la Cour que la PRI envisagée était déraisonnable et que la SPR avait commis à cet égard une erreur justifiant l'intervention de la Cour.
[20]
Étant donné que le demandeur avait une PRI, il ne peut être considéré comme un réfugié ou une personne à protéger et, par conséquent, il était raisonnable que sa demande soit rejetée.
2.
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que le demandeur n'était pas crédible
?
[21]
Comme il a déjà été mentionné, le premier point règle en totalité la demande de contrôle judiciaire. Toutefois, j'aborderai brièvement la conclusion de la SPR en matière de crédibilité par souci d'exhaustivité.
[22]
La SPR a considéré le demandeur comme non crédible sur la base d'un certain nombre de constatations. L'une d'elles est que le demandeur n'a pu expliquer pour quelle raison il serait recherché par les autorités, tandis que le président et le secrétaire général du PNB ne l'étaient pas. Il affirme n'avoir jamais eu la possibilité de répondre à cette question. Toutefois, il a été en fait questionné en long et en large sur cette question devant la SPR. Après avoir traité des allégations du demandeur selon lesquelles les autorités le recherchaient, le président de l'audience de la SPR lui a demandé [traduction] « pour quelle raison le président est-il toujours en vie? [...] pourquoi [le président et le secrétaire général] mènent-ils une vie normale? » (Voir la transcription de l'audience, dossier certifié du tribunal, aux pages 264 et 265.) Le demandeur n'a tout simplement pas fourni de réponse convainquant la SPR.
[23]
Une autre constatation qui a incité la SPR à conclure à l'absence de crédibilité du demandeur est qu'il n'a pu expliquer pourquoi la police essaierait de l'arrêter pour agitation politique. Par contre, je conclus que le demandeur a produit suffisamment d'éléments de preuve expliquant pour quelle raison il pourrait être considéré comme créant de l'agitation politique. En fait, il a expliqué à plusieurs reprises qu'il avait manifesté et inspiré les autres à le faire et qu'il s'était expressément exprimé contre une personne de la famille d'un membre du gouvernement de la LA au pouvoir.
[24]
Donc, l'appréciation de la crédibilité du demandeur n'est pas aussi claire que la SPR souhaite laisser entendre. Pour ce motif, je conclus que la SPR aurait dû examiner plus attentivement les éléments de preuve avant de les rejeter en concluant qu'ils étaient frauduleux. En l'espèce, se reposer simplement sur la preuve documentaire selon laquelle les documents officiels peuvent être frauduleusement obtenus au Bangladesh ne suffit pas. Sur cette question, la Cour a déjà conclu ainsi dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2004] ACF no 255, aux paragraphes 7 et 8:
[7] Les documents produits par le demandeur peuvent fort bien être des faux. Toutefois, la preuve d'une pratique répandue de fabrication de faux documents dans un pays n'est pas en soi suffisante pour justifier le rejet de documents étrangers au motif qu'il s'agit de faux. Comme l'a souligné le défendeur, la preuve d'une pratique répandue de fabrication de faux documents démontre uniquement que le demandeur
pouvait
se procurer des faux documents.
[8] Dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la juge Heneghan a fait remarquer aux paragraphes 4 et 5:
Le demandeur prétend notamment que la Commission a commis une erreur de droit en rejetant un document officiel sans disposer d'une preuve de son invalidité. Il se fonde à cet égard sur la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  où la Cour a dit, au paragraphe 6:
En l'espèce, la Commission a contesté la validité du certificat de naissance sans produire d'autre élément de preuve à l'appui de sa prétention et, manifestement, la question des documents étrangers n'est pas un domaine que la Commission peut prétendre connaître tout particulièrement. À mon avis, cela constitue une erreur susceptible de révision de la part de la Commission.
En l'espèce, la Commission se serait fondée sur une preuve démontrant que la contrefaçon de documents officiels était très répandue en Albanie. Bien qu'il soit question d'une telle preuve dans une note en bas de page figurant dans les motifs, il n'y a dans le dossier du tribunal aucune preuve appuyant cette conclusion de la Commission. Le dossier n'indique pas non plus que la Commission possède des connaissances ou une expertise particulières qui lui permettent de juger de la validité de documents délivrés en Albanie.
[25]
Par conséquent, la conclusion de la SPR sur la crédibilité de la documentation aurait pu recevoir une meilleure explication. Cela dit, eu égard à la décision dans son ensemble, et plus précisément à la constatation que le demandeur occupait un échelon inférieur dans le PNB et à la constatation concernant l'affirmation voulant que le demandeur puisse être une cible, tandis que le président et le secrétaire général ne le sont pas, même s'ils demeurent actifs, ces deux constatations suffisent à donner à la décision sur la question de la crédibilité la note de passage en matière de décision raisonnable. Quoi qu'il en soit, comme nous l'avons mentionné précédemment, la conclusion concernant la PRI est tout à fait raisonnable.
[26]
Les parties ont été invitées à présenter des questions à certifier, mais aucune n'a été proposée.
ORDONANCE
[27]
LA COUR ORDONNE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire soit rejetée. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]