[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application for an interlocutory injunction in an action for infringement of an industrial design registered as number 56,746 and assigned to the plaintiff. The interlocutory injunction requested would be for the purpose of restraining the defendant from making, selling, etc., its product which allegedly infringes the registered design. A request for an interim injunction was withdrawn and the parties elected to proceed to the argument of the interlocutory injunction immediately without any cross-examination on the affidavits. No issue is raised as to the right of the plaintiff as assignee of the registered design to bring this action, even though no evidence was put before me as to the registration of that assignment.
[2]
The subject of the registered design in question is a toilet plunger on which is mounted, at the top end of the handle, a painted wooden facsimile of the head of a bird. According to the evidence of the President of the plaintiff company, she designed these plungers in September, 1985, and applied for registration of an industrial design with respect to them on April 22, 1986. It appears that the design was duly registered on August 5, 1986. The plaintiff company has been making and selling the plungers for some time and at present is doing so at the rate of some 20,000 units per month. According to the evidence of the President of the defendant company, he first heard of bird-headed plungers in January, 1986 and designed such a plunger in April-May, 1986. His company started selling them in June, 1986 and at present is doing so at the rate of about 4,000 units per month.
[3]
It was contended by the defendant that the plaintiff should be disentitled to an injunction because of its delay in bringing this action. I do not think there was such delay as to have that effect. Counsel for the plaintiff first warned the defendant in a cease-and-desist letter of April 24, 1986. This was before registration of the design had been obtained by the plaintiff. A further such letter was sent to the defendant on August 6, 1986, the day after the plaintiff obtained registration. This action was commenced on November 21, 1986. The plaintiff was really not in a position to assert its right until after registration in early August. I do not think that the three months which passed after that before the commencement of the action are not undue, having regard to the need to allow some time to determine the defendant's reaction and then to prepare for the commencement of the action.
[4]
The most difficult issue here is as to whether I am entitled to consider the adequacy of damages as the basis for refusing an injunction. Reliance was placed by the plaintiff on a principle enunciated by Jackett, C.J., in The Federal Court of Canada: A Manual of Practice (1971) at page 63. He there stated that in industrial property matters where there is a clear case of copying or otherwise infringing a registered right and the defendant has contested the validity of the registration of that right said to be infringed, normally an interlocutory injunction should issue until such invalidity is established. This principle has been applied in a number of cases: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . This principle does not apply where it appears, on the application for an interlocutory injunction, that there are important questions raised as to the validity of the plaintiff's right or as to its infringement; see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R. (2d) 53 (F.C.A.). I must therefore consider whether there are any such questions raised as to the validity or infringement of the plaintiff's industrial design.
[5]
There is another reason why I should give more careful consideration to the merit of the plaintiff's claim going beyond merely satisfying myself that there is a "serious issue" to be tried, the normal requirement as laid down by the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which the Canadian courts have generally followed. It has been recognized in cases such as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 145 (F.C.A.), that the American Cyanamid test is not appropriate where the effect of granting an interlocutory injunction would be, for all practical purposes, to determine the substance of the claim. I believe that to be the situation in the present case. There is evidence to indicate that the product in questior is "faddish" in nature, the demand for it most probably being transitory only. Demand for such a product may indeed be at about its peak right now with Christmas being imminent. If the defendant is prevented from selling its product for the next several months he may well have a very limited market only by the time this case is tried.
[6]
Looking at the merit of the case, I think that important questions have been raised as to the plaintiff's claim. Accepting that the certificate of registration is, by virtue of ss. 7(3) of the Industrial Design Act R.S.C. 1970, c. I-8, prima facie proof of the originality of the design evidence presented by the defendant indicates to me that there could be serious doubt about originality and take this to be sufficient, pursuant to the Lido case above, to consider other questions such as the balance of convenience before granting an in junction. It appears to me that the evidence may well disclose in fact that the design was original with neither the plaintiff nor the defendant but was inspired from other sources. I think that there are also serious question raised by the defendant as to infringement. Whether the defendant has used the plaintiff's design or a "fraudulent imitation" of it, as required by s. 1 of the Act, is debatable. While there are obvious points of similarity, I must be recognized that anyone copying the same species of living creature is likely to produce a somewhat similar design. More particularly, it appears that there can be serious questions as to the legitimate scope of the registered design. The application for registration of the design states that it is
"characterized by the appearance of the ornamental handle appearing at one end of the plunger, said handle being generally in the outline of a bird's head including a pointed beak extending outwardly from a generally ovular-shaped head portion, substantially as shown in the appended drawings."
I believe there could be serious questions as to what the resulting registered design is intended to cover and whether, for example, it covers every toilet plunger with a bird-head of any species at either end of the plunger, giving the plaintiff a monopoly on all such designs.
[7]
Having concluded that there are important doubts as to the validity of the plaintiff's registered design and as to infringement, I must consider whether damages would be an adequate remedy for the plaintiff in place of an interlocutory injunction. The plaintiff has really presented no evidence to satisfy me that damages would not be an adequate remedy. The evidence is unconvincing that the reputation of the plaintiff company or its product will be seriously impaired if the defendant continues to produce and sell its plungers. Evidence as provided by the defendant indicates that it is capable of paying a reasonable royalty on the sales of its plungers should the plaintiff succeed in its action. Further, looking at the balance of convenience, the defendant produced evidence to the effect that the plaintiff is only able to fill approximately 60% of the orders which it is receiving for the plungers. While this maybe a seasonal situation because of the extra demand at Christmas, it means that for some time the defendant will not be cutting into the plaintiff's market: it appears that the plaintiff is unable to fill some 12,000 or 13,000 orders per month, whereas the defendant is selling plungers at the rate of 4,000 per month. Further, as to the balance of convenience, the evidence is that if the defendant is enjoined from making and selling plungers it will be obliged to lay off five employees which amounts to 50% of its work force. If, however, the defendant continues to produce and sell plungers there will be no immediate effect on the plaintiff's work force.
[8]
The defendant has undertaken to keep an account of its sales and profits until final disposition and on that basis I am dismissing the application for an interlocutory injunction.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/kam
[End of document]