 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.J. 
 
 April 29, 1994. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Singh applied to quash a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division that rejected his claim to be a Convention refugee. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - Singh claimed to be a Convention refugee on the ground of a well-founded fear of persecution based on religion, political opinion and membership in the All India Sikh Student Federation - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed his application to quash the tribunal finding that he was not a Convention refugee - Singh knew the case against him and was given an opportunity to respond - The tribunal did not err in assessing the credibility or weight of the evidence - There was evidence to support the tribunal's finding that there was no reasonable likelihood of persecution on any of the claimed grounds. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that "while a refugee claimant need not prove he has been distinctly singled out or has individually suffered persecution, he must at least demonstrate that persons in the same position face a significant possibility of persecution with respect to one of the grounds referred to in s. 2(1) of the Immigration Act. There must be some nexus between the personal situation of a refugee claimant and the general human rights situation in the country from which he is fleeing." - See paragraph 10. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1331 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Evidence - An alien found not to be a Convention refugee claimed the tribunal erred in considering the 1.5 month delay in making his claim for refugee status - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that "once an individual has fled his country of origin for fear of persecution, a delay in seeking asylum and claiming Convention refugee status may well affect the credibility of his claim" - See paragraph 11. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, sect. 2(1) [para. 10]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Lorne Waldman, for the applicant; 
 
 Alice Abbott, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Lorne Waldman, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 John C. Tait, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on January 29, 1994, before Jerome, A.C.J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on April 29, 1994. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Jerome, A.C.J. 
 : This is an application for an order in the nature of certiorari quashing the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division which held the applicant is not a Convention refugee. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicant, a 39 year old male citizen of India, arrived in Canada in December of 1990. One and a half months later he made a claim for Convention refugee status on the basis of a well-founded fear of persecution in India because of religion, political opinion and membership in the All Indian Sikh Student Federation (AISSF). The hearing into his claim was held before the Refugee Division on June 8, 1992. On August 19, 1992, the tribunal rendered its decision wherein it held Mr. Singh was not a Convention refugee. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The applicant contends that the Refugee Division breached the principles of natural justice by relying on the Standardized Country File when only the index of the file was submitted into evidence and erred by ignoring evidence properly before it, in particular a letter from the applicant's father, which Mr. Singh alleges substantiates his claim for refugee status. It is also argued that the tribunal applied the wrong test for Convention refugee, erred by taking into account the applicant's delay in making his claim, and erred by failing to consider his relationship with his brother-in-law, his membership in the AISSF and his imputed political opinion, as a basis for his fear of prosecution. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  After reviewing the material before me and considering the submissions made by the parties at the hearing of this matter on January 12, 1994, I am satisfied the application should be dismissed. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The principles of natural justice require that an individual affected by an administrative tribunal's decision know the case against him and be provided with an opportunity to respond. In the present case, at the outset of the hearing before the Refugee Division, the Refugee Hearing Officer filed a package of documents in evidence, including the index to the Standardized Information File. That, in my view, was sufficient to put the applicant and his representative on notice that the contents of the file would likely be considered by the tribunal in making its determination. Furthermore, the index allows an applicant to know the potential documentary evidence and to prepare his case accordingly. Indeed, Mr. Singh's representative indicated to the Refugee Division that he was familiar with the Standardized Country File, made no objection to the index being entered as an exhibit, nor any request for adjournment. There is nothing, therefore, to indicate that the applicant's right to know the case against him and his right to respond was disregarded. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The Refugee Division found the letter from the applicant's father, which stated Mr. Singh was still sought by authorities in India, to have no credibility. The panel's finding was based on the fact that prior to his arrest in July of 1989, and his subsequent departure from India in October of 1989, the police had shown virtually no interest in Mr. Singh's political activities. The letter from his father was written in 1992, almost three years after these events. Given the authorities' previous lack of interest, it was implausible, in the tribunal's view, that the applicant was still being sought. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  I can find no fault with the tribunal's treatment of this evidence nor its conclusion with respect to credibility. The Refugee Division is required, not only to consider the evidence before it, but to weigh its value as well. Accordingly, questions of credibility and weight of evidence are entirely within the jurisdiction of the Refugee Division as the trier of fact in Convention refugee claims. The impugned decision demonstrates the panel weighed the probative value of the letter and concluded it was not credible. That was a finding entirely within the Refugee Division's jurisdiction and there is simply no basis for the court's interference. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The applicant also submits the Refugee Division erred in law when it found his fear of persecution to be the result of civil unrest in the Punjab and therefore not a valid basis for fear of persecution within the meaning of the  
 Immigration Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. In this regard, the decision states at p. 5 as follows: 
 
 
 
 "We find that the claimant may have a generalized fear associated with the ongoing civil unrest between militant separatist Sikh groups and the police forces in the Punjab as outlined in the various documents presented by counsel and the RHO. No doubt his fear is felt by all residents of that troubled region and as such fails the test set out in the  
 Salibian 
  case." 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The applicant maintains that in so finding, the Refugee Division misconstrued the Federal Court of Appeal decision in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  I do not agree. While a refugee claimant need not prove he has been distinctly singled out or has individually suffered persecution, he must at least demonstrate that persons in the same position face a significant possibility of persecution with respect to one of the grounds referred to in s. 2(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 . There must be some nexus between the personal situation of a refugee claimant and the general human rights situation in the country from which he is fleeing. Accordingly, the onus was on Mr. Singh to adduce some evidence that any violations of human rights which did exist posed a threat to him personally should he return to India. Clearly, the Refugee Division was not satisfied this onus had been met and, based on the evidence, that was an altogether reasonable conclusion. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The decision was also challenged on the grounds the Refugee Division erred by taking into account Mr. Singh's one and a half month delay in making his claim for Convention refugee status. However, once an individual has fled his country of origin for fear of persecution, a delay in seeking asylum and claiming Convention refugee status may well affect the credibility of his claim. Accordingly, the Refugee Division was entitled to take into account the circumstances surrounding the applicant's delay in its assessment of his fear of persecution. I am unable to conclude it committed any reviewable error in doing so. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Finally, the applicant submits the Refugee Division erred by failing to consider his relationship with his brother-in-law, his membership in the AISSF and his imputed political opinion, as valid grounds for his fear of persecution. However, the fact an administrative tribunal does not summarize all the evidence before it in its written reasons does not mean the evidence has been ignored or misconstrued. The reasons of the Refugee Division need not list every conceivable factor which may have influenced its decision. In the present case, the reasons demonstrate an understanding of the pertinent issues and of the relevant evidence. There is nothing to indicate the Refugee Division failed to consider any aspect of Mr. Singh's claim. On the contrary, it is clearly implicit in its reasons that the tribunal considered there to be no reasonable likelihood of persecution on any of these grounds. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  As there was evidence to support the Refugee Division's findings of fact and its decision does not reveal any reviewable error of law, the application is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/nmg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



