[1]
Reed, J.
: The applicant seeks an order quashing a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board"). That decision found him not to be a Convention refugee.
[2]
The Board's decision is challenged on two main grounds: (1) the applicant was not given notice,
before
the commencement of the hearing of his application, that the possible existence of an internal flight alternative ("IFA") would be an issue in his case; (2) the Board, in finding that the applicant was not a Convention refugee, because an IFA existed, did not expressly state in its reasons that it had determined that it was reasonable for the applicant to take refuge in such alternative internal location. The alternative location in this case is some place in Colombia other than Medellin.
Notice
[3]
The applicant's arguments concerning notice are based on the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 682; 22 Imm. L.R.(2d) 241 (F.C.A.). In that case, in discussing the earlier decisions of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 114 (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Linden explained that the seeming confusion which had arisen in reading those decisions was the result of a failure to distinguish between the onus, which was on the Minister, to warn a claimant that an IFA issue would be raised and the onus, which was on the claimant, to prove a serious possibility of persecution existed throughout his country of nationality and not merely in one part. In explaining the requirement for notice Mr. Justice Linden stated, at p. 245:
"... there is an onus on the Minister and the Board to warn the claimant if an IFA is going to be raised. A refugee claimant enjoys the benefit of the principles of natural justice in hearings before the Refugee Division. A basic and well-established component of the right to be heard includes notice of the case to be met. ...
This right to notice
of the case against the claimant
is acutely important where the claimant may be called upon to provide evidence to show that no valid IFA exists in response to an allegation by the Minister
. Therefore,
neither the Minister nor the Refugee Division may spring the allegation of an IFA upon a complainant without notice that an IFA will be in issue at the hearing
." (underlining added)
[4]
Counsel argues that this means that an applicant must be given notice that an IFA will be in issue
before
the commencement of the first day of his hearing, so that the applicant has notice of this from the time he begins to give his evidence. I do not think this is the case. I do not read Mr. Justice Linden's comments as a direction that some sort of formal notice must be given to a refugee claimant ahead of the date of the hearing. Mr. Justice Linden went on to explain, by way of example, the kind of notice which must be given. Quoting Mr. Justice Mahoney in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , he wrote:
"[A] claimant is not to be expected to raise the question of an IFA nor is an allegation that none exists simply to be inferred from the claim itself.
The question must be expressly raised at the hearing by the hearing officer or the Board and the claimant afforded the opportunity to address it with evidence and argument
." (underlining added)
[5]
The requirement of notice is to ensure that an individual is not taken by surprise, to ensure that an individual is not prejudiced. All that is required is that, once the issue is raised, an adequate opportunity to respond be given to the claimant.
[6]
In the present case, the applicant's hearing commenced on August 27, 1992. At the very beginning of the proceedings the Refugee Hearing Officer stated that, as in all refugee claims, two issues were before the Board: credibility and the possibility of an IFA. Much of the initial part of the proceedings was taken up with the question of whether or not the Board had jurisdiction, the applicant having been convicted of a serious criminal offence. He had been arrested in 1989, in Canada, and charged with conspiracy to traffic in narcotics. He pleaded guilty, was sentenced to four and one half years' imprisonment, of which he was required to serve ten months. The Board found that the applicant was not excluded from making a claim for refugee status because of his conviction.
[7]
The proceedings of August 27 were subsequently adjourned and reconvened on January 12, 1993. As a result of that adjournment, after notice had been given that an IFA was in issue, the applicant had abundant opportunity to marshall any evidence he might wish to present on the subject and to address that issue in argument. Also, during the course of his hearing the applicant was asked about the fact that his parents had now moved from Medellin and were "in hiding" in San Bernardo. He was asked whether or not if he returned to Colombia he could not do the same. He denied that he could, but the Board for a number of reasons did not believe him. He was given the opportunity to address the Board's concerns about living outside Medellin. The issue was not "sprung on him", for example, by never being mentioned until the Board wrote its decision. It is not remotely possible that any prejudice or surprise arose in this case, as a result of insufficient notice having been given.
Location Reasonable In All The
Circumstances
[8]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra) Mr. Justice Mahoney stated that two criteria must be fulfilled in finding that a claimant has an IFA: the Board must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there is no serious possibility of the claimant being persecuted in the new location, and the conditions in the new location must be such that it would not be unreasonable for the claimant to seek refuge there. The applicant argues that the Board did not expressly address its mind to whether relocating outside Medellin was a reasonable alternative for the applicant.
[9]
To assess this argument the Board's decision must be considered in detail. The facts in this case are an excellent example of Mr. Justice Mahoney's comments, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that "the determination of whether or not there is an IFA is integral to the determination [of] whether or not a claimant is a Convention refugee".
[10]
The Board in reaching its decision concluded that the applicant came from a political family that was active in the Social Conservative Party, one of the most prominent of the mainstream political parties in Colombia. The Board accepted the applicant's evidence that he had campaigned on behalf of that party and that members of his family had been killed as a result of their involvement in politics. One of the applicant's brothers was murdered in Medellin, in August, 1985. Threatening calls had been made to the family's home in Medellin prior to the applicant's departure for Canada in May 1987. After the applicant came to Canada, two uncles and two brothers were killed in Medellin.
[11]
The Board noted that there was documentary evidence indicating that Colombia was a violent, lawless society, where law enforcement officers are ineffective or corrupt and that (many) most killings relate either to the drug trade, politics or personal vendettas. The Board stated that "In the face of that kind of evidence, it would appear that the claimant would have a strong claim based on the ... grounds asserted".
[12]
The Board went on, however, to state that in order to succeed in his claim the applicant had to demonstrate that there was no reasonable flight alternative within his own country available to him. The Board then proceeded to analyse the evidence. The following is a summary of the analysis in the order in which the Board presented it.
[13]
(1) While the applicant's family had been based in Medellin and five of the family members had been killed there,
his parents were now living elsewhere in Colombia
. While the claimant asserted they were in hiding, they did not appear to be in danger from assassins since both parents had been to Canada, for a two month visit, and neither had made a Convention refugee claim. When asked by the Board why his mother had not done so the claimant had replied that she did not like the cold Canadian weather and was old and wished to die in Colombia. The Board did not refer to the reason the applicant's father did not apply for refugee status but presumably it was because, while he was in Canada, in 1989, a warrant was issued for his arrest on drug charges. The applicant's brother, sister and brother-in-law were also charged. Three of the applicant's brothers and sisters are seeking Convention refugee status in Canada. The Board concluded that the reason the applicant's parents were no longer in danger was because they were no longer deeply involved in politics and were no longer living in Medellin.
[14]
(2) The applicant
never personally received any death threats
.
[15]
(3) After the August 1985 murder of the applicant's brother, the applicant moved to
live with a friend on the outskirts of Medellin
. He stayed there for two years. Although he characterized this as being "in hiding", the Board noted that: he had stopped his political activities; he had worked as an artisan weaving chairs out of cane; he had gone by public transportation to an afternoon welding course at a technical school; he had gone to church on Sundays two or three times a month.
[16]
(4) The Board noted that during the 1985-1987 period the applicant's
involvement in politics had ceased
.
[17]
(5) The Board stated that, in any event, his
involvement in politics was at all times at a very low level
(he had a sketchy, unreliable knowledge of Colombian politics, even of his own family's involvement) and acknowledged, in oral evidence, that his involvement was "not very deep".
[18]
(6) The Board noted that the applicant
did not really know who the agents of the persecution were
- whether the threats emanated from members and supporters of one or more of the opposing political parties or from other fellow travelling Social Conservatives, motivated by intra-party animosity. Thus, the Board concluded that it was difficult for the claimant to persuade the Board that there was any likelihood that any of these potential adversaries would be the least bit interested in pursuing, across Colombia, "a low-level marginal campaign worker who had not been politically involved at all since 1985 and who had been outside Colombia since 1987".
[19]
(7) The Board referred to the applicant's mother's declaration, given in March of 1991. The Board described that declaration as referring to "phone threats against the life of the claimant and his brother Gabriel Octavio Valencia Posada (now relocated in Kingston, Ontario as one of Her Majesty's guests) ... that their lives could be
in danger if they did not leave the city
[i.e. Medellin]".
[20]
On the basis of this analysis the Board concluded that while, back in 1985, in Medellin, the applicant might have had a well-founded fear of persecution on grounds of political opinion and membership in a particular social group (as a member of a particular family), the definition of Convention refugee is forward-looking and he has a viable internal flight alternative elsewhere in Colombia.
[21]
The Board in doing its analysis did not distinguish between considerations relevant to the possibility of persecution, at the present time, in Medellin, and whether, if such existed, the applicant has a viable flight alternative, to somewhere outside that city. The Board dealt with all the evidence "as one ball of wax". In that context, it is argued that the Board erred because it did not expressly refer to the two pronged test in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and did not articulate, in its reasons, any express analysis of the factors that led it to conclude that a location outside of Medellin was reasonable for the applicant.
[22]
I have not been persuaded that the Board's decision should be set aside. In the first place, an analysis of the reasonableness of an IFA outside Medellin is implicit in the Board's decision. The Board refers to the fact that the applicant's parents are living elsewhere without serious threat of persecution and concludes that the applicant could do likewise. Secondly, there is no convincing evidence as to why a location outside Medellin would not be reasonable for the applicant. The family home is no longer in Medellin. He personally does not have a home or family there. He has not lived there for many years. There is no evidence of language or cultural barriers which would make living outside Medellin unreasonable. There is no evidence that any undue physical hardship would be involved. The applicant was asked questions about living outside Medellin and he gave no convincing reasons as to why that would be unreasonable. The burden of proof is on the applicant to prove his case, and part of that burden involves proving the unreasonableness of living in his own country.
[23]
In addition, while the Board framed its decision in terms of an IFA, it also seemed not convinced that, in 1993, the applicant was likely to be persecuted in Medellin. It made no express finding that such persecution would likely exist. The Board stated only that "on a subjective and objective basis he
might have had, back in 1985
, while in Medellin, a well-founded fear of persecution ... [but] the definition of Convention refugee is forward-looking". There is no finding that a serious possibility exists that the applicant would face persecution in Medellin today. Accordingly, I am not prepared to set aside the Board's decision.
Certification
[24]
I was asked to certify two questions:
1. Is there a requirement that notice must be given to an applicant for Convention refugee status, prior to the commencement of his or her hearing, before the possible existence of an IFA can be made an issue at the hearing?
2. When giving its reasons for a finding that an IFA exists, is a Board required to explicitly articulate that in all the circumstances, including those particular to the applicant, that the conditions were such that it would not be unreasonable for the applicant to seek refuge in that alternative location?
[25]
On reflection, I have decided that neither question should be certified. I do not think they raise unsettled issues of law. With respect to the first, it is my view that the law is clear. I do not read Mr. Justice Linden's decision as requiring the kind of notice counsel suggests. Such a requirement would be out of keeping with administrative law principles generally. It would give procedural formality precedence over the practical application of the principles of natural justice. It would be out of keeping with the whole nature of a Convention refugee hearing, supposedly nonadversarial, informal in nature, and where ajdournments can be and are given if unexpected matters arise. It would also be inconsistent with the fact that the burden of proof is on the applicant. The applicant is bringing the evidence to the Board. In that context, to require the Board or the Refugee Hearing Officer to give notice ahead of time that they will be considering an IFA is not reasonable. Indeed, notice is implicit, in most cases, by reason of the fact that applicants must prove that they cannot avail themselves of the protection of their own country. This may not always be so where the country is comprised of different tribal groups located in distinct geographical areas or, particularly, where different areas are under the control of different authorities, but in general this is so.
[26]
With respect to the second question, I perceive it to be directed to the form in which a Board decision is required to be written. I do not think there is serious doubt that a reviewing court will not set aside a decision when the evidence supports the conclusion which the Board reached, despite the fact that there are lacunae in the written text. If an absence of analysis in a decision leads a judge to conclude that the Board did not consider a crucial element of a legal test, or misunderstood or did not consider the evidence, then, the decision will be set aside. But decisions are not set aside merely because the Board did not write a decision in as full a manner as might be wished. The administrative law test is whether there is sufficient evidence to support the conclusion reached by the Board. I do not think either of the questions for which a certification is sought raises a serious question of general importance.
[27]
For the reasons given this application will be dismissed and no questions are certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/slm
[End of document]