 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Espinoza v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2012), 409 F.T.R. 20 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. MY.027 
 
 
 
 Esteban Felipe Lopez Espinoza (demandeur) v. Le Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration du Canada (défendeur) 
 
 (IMM-8216-11; 2012 CF 502; 2012 FC 502) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Espinoza v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Shore, J. 
 
 May 1, 2012. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The applicant (a Mexican citizen) and his ex-spouse left Mexico for Canada on the same date on which they claimed refugee protection. The applicant alleged that he feared the ex-spouse of his ex-spouse. The morning of the hearing, the applicant alleged that he feared a criminal group which had forced him to take drugs and drink for a number of years. The Refugee Protection Division (RPD) rejected the refugee claim primarily because of the applicant's lack of credibility. The RPD found that that there was no credible basis for the refugee claim under s. 107(2) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act because the applicant had not adduced any credible evidence. The applicant applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1305 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - Judicial review - Evidence (incl. credibility) - [See first  
 Aliens - Topic 1323.4 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.4 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Credible basis for claim - The Refugee Protection Division (RPD) rejected the refugee claim primarily because of the applicant's lack of credibility - The Federal Court stated that "[a]ssessing credibility based on the facts falls within the RPD's expertise. Accordingly, a high level of judicial deference is required with respect to this type of finding, and the appropriate standard of review is reasonableness" - See paragraph 13. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.4 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Credible basis for claim - The applicant (a Mexican citizen) and his ex-spouse left Mexico for Canada and claimed refugee protection - The applicant alleged that he feared the ex-spouse of his ex-spouse - The morning of the hearing, the applicant alleged that he feared a criminal group which had forced him to take drugs and drink for a number of years - The Refugee Protection Division (RPD) rejected the refugee claim primarily because of the applicant's lack of credibility - The RPD found that there was no credible basis for the refugee claim under s. 107(2) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act because the applicant had not adduced any credible evidence - On judicial review, the applicant challenged in particular the credibility findings with respect to his ex-spouse's narrative, which the RPD accepted in another case - The Federal Court stated that "[in] this regard, it is important to mention that each case turns on its own facts. Since the subjective fear analysis is based on the facts, the RPD is not bound by a decision made in another claim" - The jurisprudence established that "differences between statements at the port of entry and testimony at the hearing may affect credibility where these contradictions bear on elements that are central to the narrative" - Concerning the no credible basis finding, the RPD gave sufficient reasons concerning the applicant's credibility to support that finding - See paragraphs 13 to 19. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1334 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Appeals or judicial review - Scope of review - [See first  
 Aliens - Topic 1323.4 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27, sect. 107(2) [para. 21]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Claudette Menghile, for the applicant; 
 
 Guillaume Bigaouette, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Claudette Menghile, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant; 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application for judicial review was heard at Montreal, Quebec, on April 25, 2012, before Shore, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following reasons for judgment and judgment, dated May 1, 2012. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Shore, J. 
  [Translation]: The applicant's credibility is at the heart of this application for judicial review. As the Federal Court of Appeal stated in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 II.  
 Legal proceeding 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  This is an application under subsection 72(1) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA], for judicial review of a decision by the Refugee Protection Division [RPD] of the Immigration and Refugee Board [IRB] dated October 18, 2011, which determined that the applicant is neither a Convention refugee as defined in section 96 of the IRPA nor a person in need of protection under section 97 of the IRPA. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The applicant, Esteban Felipe Lopez Espinoza, is a Mexican citizen. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The applicant alleges that he fears Rodrigo Sanchez, the ex-spouse of his ex-spouse, Erendira Campos Palomo, with whom he has a daughter. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The applicant and his ex-spouse left Mexico for Canada on December 28, 2008, the date on which they claimed refugee protection. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The morning of the hearing, the applicant changed his narrative to allege that he feared a criminal group named Los Pelones [LP], which had forced him to take drugs and drink for a number of years. 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Decision that is the subject of this judicial review 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The RPD rejected the refugee claim primarily because of the applicant's lack of credibility. The RPD noted that the applicant was not a reliable witness because his testimony was peppered with hesitations, contradictions and inconsistencies. The RPD also criticized the applicant for the lack of evidence corroborating his narrative. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The RPD drew an adverse inference regarding the applicant's credibility from the fact that he substantially amended his Personal Information Form [PIF] the morning of the hearing by adding facts that he did not mention to the immigration officer when he entered Canada. The RPD found that that there was no credible basis for the refugee claim under subsection 107(2) of the IRPA because the applicant had not adduced any credible evidence. 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Issue 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Is the RPD's decision reasonable? 
 
 
 
 VI.  
 Relevant statutory provisions 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The following provisions of the IRPA apply to this case: 
 
 
 
 Convention refugee 
 
 
 
 96. 
  A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion, 
 
 
 
 ( 
 a 
 ) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or 
 
 
 
 ( 
 b 
 ) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country. 
 
 
 
 Person in need of protection 
 
 
 
 97. 
  (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally 
 
 
 
 ( 
 a 
 ) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or 
 
 
 
 ( 
 b 
 ) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if 
 
 
 
 (i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country, 
 
 
 
 (ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country, 
 
 
 
 (iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and 
 
 
 
 (iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care. 
 
 
 
 Person in need of protection 
 
 
 
 (2) A person in Canada who is a member of a class of persons prescribed by the regulations as being in need of protection is also a person in need of protection 
 
 
 
 Decision 
 
 
 
 107. 
  (1) The Refugee Protection Division shall accept a claim for refugee protection if it determines that the claimant is a Convention refugee or person in need of protection, and shall otherwise reject the claim. 
 
 
 
 No credible basis 
 
 
 
 (2) If the Refugee Protection Division is of the opinion, in rejecting a claim, that there was no credible or trustworthy evidence on which it could have made a favourable decision, it shall state in its reasons for the decision that there is no credible basis for the claim. 
 
 
 
 VII.  
 Position of the parties 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The applicant is primarily disputing the RPD's credibility findings. He contends that the RPD could not question the truthfulness of his narrative with respect to his fear of Rodrigo Sanchez because another RPD member accepted his ex-spouse as a refugee on the same ground. The applicant's testimony, however, focused on this fact during the hearing. The applicant is also disputing the RPD's failure to give reasons for its no credible basis finding. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The respondent takes the position that the RPD's findings on the applicant's credibility are justified and that the RPD was not bound by findings made in the context of the refugee claim of the applicant's ex-spouse. With respect to the finding that there was no credible basis for the refugee claim, the respondent submits that the RPD is not required to provide reasons for this finding. 
 
 
 
 VIII.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Assessing credibility based on the facts falls within the RPD's expertise. Accordingly, a high level of judicial deference is required with respect to this type of finding, and the appropriate standard of review is reasonableness ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  It is well established in the jurisprudence that differences between statements at the port of entry and testimony at the hearing may affect credibility where these contradictions bear on elements that are central to the narrative ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  In this case, a number of factors diminished the applicant's credibility in the RPD's view: 
 
 
 
 (a) The applicant stated that he had seen Rodrigo Sanchez three times but was unable to specify the dates of these encounters. 
 
 
 
 (b) The applicant was unable to describe Rodrigo Sanchez because his ex-spouse had not given him any information. 
 
 
 
 (c) The applicant admitted that Rodrigo Sanchez had not lived with his ex-spouse but that she had dated him for two months, contrary to what he stated in his PIF. 
 
 
 
 (d) The applicant contradicted himself by testifying that he had lived with his maternal aunt before leaving for Canada while his PIF states that he had lived with his parents. 
 
 
 
 (e) The applicant amended his narrative the morning of the hearing to allege that he feared the LP gang, which had persecuted him in the city of Leon for years. He justified this omission in his port-of-entry statement by saying that he was ashamed of his past. 
 
 
 
 (f) The applicant contradicted himself during his testimony on the issue of the complaint he filed with the Public Ministry against Rodigo Sanchez. He did not have a copy of the complaint with him at the hearing. 
 
 
 
 (g) The applicant contradicted himself on his relationship with his family members in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The applicant challenges in particular the credibility findings with respect to his ex-spouse's narrative, which the RPD accepted in another case. In the applicant's view, since the RPD was in possession of this information, it could not doubt that the persecutor existed. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  In this regard, it is important to mention that each case turns on its own facts. Since the subjective fear analysis is based on the facts, the RPD is not bound by a decision made in another claim ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Concerning the no credible basis finding, the Court refers to the reasoning of Justice Yvon Pinard in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED . . . 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  In this case, the RPD gave sufficient reasons concerning the applicant's credibility to support its no credible basis finding. 
 
 
 
 IX.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  For all the aforementioned reasons, the applicant's application for judicial review is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [21] 
   
 THE COURT ORDERS that 
  the applicant's application for judicial review is dismissed. No question of general importance to certify. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: E. Joanne Oley/klf 
 
 
 

