 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Iscar Limited and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  14, 1989. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The plaintiffs brought a copyright infringement action against the defendants. The defendants applied under Federal Court Rule 419(1) to strike the statement of claim as disclosing no cause of action. The defendants raised the issue of the prothonotary's jurisdiction to hear and dispose of the application. 
 
 
 
 The Associate Senior Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, in a decision reported 24 F.T.R. 14, ruled that he had jurisdiction pursuant to rule 336(1)(g) and Practice Note No. 3. The prothonotary dismissed the application. The defendants appealed. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the appeal and affirmed that the prothonotary had jurisdiction to hear the application. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 2523 
 
 Registrars and prothonotaries - Jurisdiction - Interlocutory applications - Rule 419(1) of the Federal Court Rules gave "the Court" power to strike pleadings - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that a Federal Court Prothonotary had jurisdiction pursuant to the Federal Court Act to hear an application to strike under rule 419(1), where the application was assigned to him by special direction of the Chief Justice or the Associate Chief Justice - See paragraphs 1 to 6. 
 
 
 
 Practice - Topic 2201 
 
 Pleadings - Striking out pleadings - Jurisdiction - [See  
 Courts - Topic 2523  
 above]. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), consd. [para. 4]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Nfld. C.A.), consd. [para. 4]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, sect. 2, sect. 5 [para. 2]; sect. 12 [para. 4]; sect. 12(1), sect. 12(3) [para. 3]; sect. 15, sect. 46 [para. 5]; sect. 46(1), sect. 46(1)(h) [paras. 3, 5]; sect. 46(4) [para. 3]; sect. 336(1)(g) [paras. 3, 5]; sect. 336(5) [para. 3]; sect. 419(1) [para. 1 et seq.]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Mark K. Evan, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Roger T. Hughes, for the defendants. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Smart & Biggar, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiffs; 
 
 Sim, Hughes, Dimock, Toronto, Ontario, for the defendants. 
 
 
 
 This appeal was heard in Toronto, Ontario, on February 14, 1989, before Jerome, A.C.J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on April 14, 1989. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Jerome, A.C.J. 
 : This appeal from the decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dismissing the defendants' application to strike out the plaintiffs' statement of claim, came on for hearing at Toronto, Ontario, on December 12, 1988. Before arguing the merits of the appeal, the defendants raised the issue of the jurisdiction of a prothonotary to strike out a pleading pursuant to rule 419(1) of the Federal Court Rules. This same issue was raised before me on January 30, 1989, in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. On February 14, 1989, I gave reasons from the bench indicating that the prothonotary does have jurisdiction to decide applications pursuant to rule 419(1) and that these brief written reasons would follow. Given the importance of this issue, I have combined the arguments presented in both cases in these reasons. My decision on the question of the prothonotary's jurisdiction under rule 419(1) will therefore apply to both cases. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  Rule 419(1) provides: 
 
 
 
 "Rule 419(1) The court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that: 
 
 
 
 (a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be, 
 
 
 
 (b) it is immaterial or redundant, 
 
 
 
 (c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, 
 
 
 
 (d) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action, 
 
 
 
 (e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or 
 
 
 
 (f) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court, 
 
 
 
 and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly." 
 
 
 
 Counsel in both actions raised several arguments in support of their contention that only a judge of the Federal Court has jurisdiction to decide an application brought pursuant to rule 419(1). First, it was argued that the term "the court" in rule 419(1) means a judge of the Federal Court since pursuant to s. 2 of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, "Court" or "Federal Court" means the Federal Court of Canada. Section 5 which sets out the composition of the Federal Court of Canada refers to the Chief Justice, the Associate Chief Justice and the remaining number of judges to be appointed to the Court. Since prothonotaries are not specifically mentioned in s. 5, counsel argued that any reference to "the Court" in the Act or the Federal Court Rules is restricted to a judge of the Court. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The appointment of prothonotaries is provided for in s. 12(1) of the Federal Court Act: 
 
 
 
 "12(1) The Governor in Council may appoint as prothonotaries of the Court such fit and proper persons who are barristers or advocates in any of the provinces as are, in his opinion, necessary for the efficient performance of the work of the Court that, under the Rules, is to be performed by them." 
 
 
 
 The specific duties and functions of the prothonotaries are to be determined by the Federal Court Rules (s. 12(3)). Section 46(1) of the Act authorizes the judges of the Court to make general rules and orders. Section 46(1)(h) provides that: 
 
 
 
 "46(1) Subject to the approval of the Governor in Council and subject also to subs. (4), the judges of the court may, from time to time, make general rules and orders not inconsistent with this or any other Act of the Parliament of Canada, 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (h) empowering a prothonotary to exercise any authority or jurisdiction, subject to supervision by the Court, even though such authority may be of a judicial nature;" 
 
 
 
 The limitation on that authority, in s. 46(4) pertains to the publishing of proposed rules and orders in the Canada Gazette and the invitation to make representations. In accordance with the authority granted in s. 46(1), the judges of the Court made rule 336 specifying the powers of the prothonotaries. The relevant portions of that rule are as follows: 
 
 
 
 "336(1) Notwithstanding rule 326(1), a prothonotary shall have power 
 
 
 
 (a) to do anything that he is by these Rules authorized to do, 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (g) to dispose of any interlocutory application assigned to him specially or to any prothonotary, by special or general direction of the Chief Justice or of the Associate Chief Justice. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "336(3) Every order or decision made or given by a prothonotary under this Rule is as valid and binding on all parties concerned as if it had been made or given by the Court." 
 
 
 
 Pursuant to rule 336(5) decisions or orders of a prothonotary (other than judgments under rules 432 to 437) may be appealed to the Court. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Counsel for the appellant in the Wagon-Wheel Concessions Ltd. case argued at length that a prothonotary appointed pursuant to s. 12 does not have jurisdiction to decide questions of law or other matters traditionally reserved to a judge. After reviewing the historical duties of both prothonotaries and masters, counsel concluded and I quote from paragraph 16 of counsel's written argument: 
 
 
 
 "16. It is therefore not within the competence of the Federal Parliament, using its power to establish a Court, to confer upon an officer of the Court a power to decide questions of law, which traditionally had been the exclusive jurisdiction of a judge at the time of Confederation. Taken to the extreme, it could not have been intended that Parliament had the power to give a non-judge sufficient power or authority to make him practically a judge." 
 
 
 
 In the very case heavily relied upon by counsel throughout his arguments,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 20, Harvey, C.J., of the Alberta Supreme Court points out on the contrary that: 
 
 
 
 "... It is true that the office of master is of comparatively recent origin in this Court, and it is also true that the duties which the master performs were, before the creation of the office, largely performed, as far as they then existed, by the judges of the Court, but it by no means follows that he is therefore a judge any more than it would follow, if a judge acted as clerk of his own Court, swearing the witnesses, making records and performing other clerical duties, that a clerk, to relieve him of those duties would be a judge. There is, however, the important difference that the duties performed by the master in relief of the judges are, to a considerable extent at least, judicial in their character." 
 
 
 
 Counsel further relied upon  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.), to support his contention that s. 46(1)(h) is invalid since Parliament cannot after providing for the appointment of prothonotaries give authority to the judges of the court to make rules empowering the prothonotaries to perform judicial functions traditionally performed by a judge. I have thoroughly reviewed each of these cases and I am satisfied that they are not relevant to the jurisdictional issue raised here since those cases dealt with the conferring of jurisdiction on a provincially appointed official.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s. 96 of the British North America Act for the following reasons: 
 
 
 
 "It requires no more than a superficial examination of the sections of the Mechanics' Lien Act to which I have referred to compel the conviction that in enacting the provisions of s. 31(1) the legislature has purported to vest in an officer of the Supreme Court of Ontario, judicial power which can be validly exercised only by a superior, District, or County Court or by a tribunal analogous thereto. In my opinion this legislation purports to confer upon the master or assistant master a jurisdiction which broadly conforms to the type of jurisdiction exercised by such Courts. As the masters and assistant masters are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council and not by the Governor General of Canada, the legislation plainly constitutes a violation of s. 96 of the British North America Act and must be held invalid as being legislation which is beyond the competency of the provincial legislature to enact." 
 
 
 
 Here, however, s. 12(1) provides for the appointment of prothonotaries by the Governor-in-Council. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The argument which gave me the most difficulty and which was raised by both counsel involves the principle of "delegates non protest delegare". Counsel contended that s. 46 delegates to the judges of the court the power to make rules relating to, among other things, the powers of prothonotaries (s. 46(1)(h)). That authority cannot be further delegated as rule 336(1)(g) has done: 
 
 
 
 "336(1) ..., a prothonotary shall have power 
 
 
 
 (g) to dispose of any interlocutory application assigned to him specifically or to any prothonotary, by special or general direction of the Chief Justice or of the Associate Chief Justice." 
 
 
 
 In accordance with my authority under s. 15 and the jurisdiction given prothonotaries to dispose of interlocutory applications under rule 336(1)(g), I issued practice note 3 providing for the hearing of interlocutory applications, with specified limitations, by the senior and associate senior prothonotary. In my view, this does not constitute any further delegation. It is clear from s. 46(1)(h) of the Act that Parliament did not intend prothonotaries to act simply as procedural officers of the Court. On the contrary, it is clear from that section that Parliament intended prothonotaries to have jurisdiction of a judicial nature. In order to exercise that jurisdiction, however, there must be a Federal Court Rule empowering the prothonotary to do so, hence rule 336. The jurisdiction of the prothonotary to hear interlocutory applications springs from s. 46(1). The power to exercise that jurisdiction is found in rule 336(1)(g). The exercise of that jurisdiction is limited to "... any interlocutory application assigned to him specially or to any prothonotary, by special or general direction of the Chief Justice or of the Associate Chief Justice". Applications to strike a pleading under rule 419(1) are clearly interlocutory applications despite the fact that the decisions may finally determine the matters. The jurisdiction of prothonotaries to hear them does not originate in our rule or my practice note, but in the Federal Court Act. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  I am, therefore, satisfied that the Associate Senior Prothonotary, did not err in concluding that he had jurisdiction to hear these applications under rule 419(1). 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  I will now consider the merits of the appeal from the decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary not to strike out the plaintiff's statement of claim in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  copyright infringement by the defendants by: 
 
 
 
 (i) importing, making, etc. tools which are three dimensional reproductions of drawings owned by Iscar Limited; and 
 
 
 
 (ii) preparing, distributing, etc. brochures, catalogues and packaging material containing two dimensional reproductions of the defendants' tools identified in (i) above. 
 
 
 
 By notice of motion filed June 10, 1988, the defendants sought an order striking out the plaintiffs' statement of claim on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action (rule 419(1)(a)). By order dated November 4, 1988, the Associate Senior Prothonotary dismissed the application [see 24 F.T.R. 14]. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Both before the prothonotary and myself, counsel for the defendants argued that the defendants' conduct did not amount to copyright infringement under the Copyright Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42, as it read at the time of the alleged infringement. In any event, An Act to amend the Copyright Act, S.C. 1988, c. 15, assented to June 8, 1988, includes the following: 
 
 
 
 "46.1(1) The following acts do not constitute an infringement of the copyright or moral rights in a work: 
 
 
 
 (a) applying to a useful article features that are dictated solely by a utilitarian function of the article; 
 
 
 
 (b) by reference solely to a useful article, making a drawing or other reproduction in any material form of any features of the article that are dictated solely by utilitarian function of the article; 
 
 
 
 (c) doing with a useful article having only features described in paragraph (a) or doing with a drawing or reproduction that is made as described in paragraph (b) anything that the owner of the copyright has the sole right to do with the work; or 
 
 
 
 (d) using any method or principle of manufacture or construction. 
 
 
 
 "46.1(2) Nothing in subsection (1) affects the copyright or the moral rights in a record, perforated roll, cinematograph film or other contrivance by means of which a work may be mechanically reproduced, performed or delivered. 
 
 
 
 "24. Subs. 46(1) and s. 46.1 of the Copyright Act, as enacted by s. 11, apply in respect of any alleged infringement of copyright occurring prior to, on or after the day on which section 11 comes into force." 
 
 
 
 Counsel argues that s. 24 was clearly enacted to take away any right that the plaintiffs may have had to bring an action in respect to the alleged infringment of copyright. This argument was rejected by the Associate Senior Prothonotary. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  It is well-established that an appeal from a decision of a prothonotary is not a trial de novo. I must therefore be convinced that the decision was based on a wrong principle of law or a misapprehension of the facts, and I am not. For an application under rule 419(1)(a) to succeed, it must be plain and obvious that the pleading discloses no reasonable cause of action. Where the statement of claim establishes a possible cause of action it will not be struck. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Clearly, the defendants' denial that their actions constitute infringement as known to the law is the basic issue of this, and indeed any lawsuit. Let us assume that the defendants' analysis of the legal effect of the 1988 amendments is sound. The plaintiffs cannot be denied the opportunity to persuade a trial judge either that the plaintiffs escape the impact of them on factual grounds, or to the extent that the amendments purport to deny the plaintiffs their remedy retrospectively, they are bad law. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed. Costs in the cause. 
 
 
 
 Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



