[1]
Pinard, J.
: Upon an application made on behalf of the respondent, Bell Canada, for:
"1. An order pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) of the
Federal Court Rules
striking the Originating Notice of Motion as it discloses no reasonable cause of action as the applicant is not a 'person interested' within the meaning of ss. 57 and 2 of the
Trade Marks Act
(R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13);"
failing which,
"2. An order pursuant to s. 59(2) of the
Trade Marks Act
and rule 704(8) of the
Federal Court Rules
granting the respondent:
(i) a delay until June 30, 1991 to file its reply in the present proceedings; and
(ii) a delay until September 30, 1991 to file any affidavits which it proposes to put before the Court for the hearing;"
and, in any event,
"3. An order pursuant to rules 3(1)(c) and 321(2) of the
Federal Court Rules
reducing the delay within which this motion and supporting affidavit may be filed and served upon the applicant;"
Reasons For Order
[2]
With respect to 1. above, the Originating Notice of Motion is an application under s. 57 of the
Trade Marks Act
, hence, the relevancy of this Court's rules 702 through 705. Thus, the effect of paragraph (6) of rule 702, which states that proceedings under s. 57 of the
Trade Marks Act
must be instituted in accordance with s. 58 of that
Act
, is that an application under s. 57 must be made either by the filing of an Originating Notice of Motion, by counterclaim in an action for the infringement of the trademark, or by statement of claim in an action claiming additional relief under the
Trade Marks Act
. Rules 704 and 705 contain specific provisions concerning the summary procedures prescribed by s. 59 of the
Trade Marks Act
. As for the application of the other
Rules
of this Court, paragraph (3) of rule 705 permits it as follows:
"705(3) Except to the extent that they are inconsistent with a statutory provision or a provision made under statutory authority, or are inconsistent with rules 703 and 704 or with this rule, the other provisions of these rules, with necessary modifications and in sofaras they are reasonably appropriate, are applicable to proceedings referred to in rule 702."
[3]
It is therefore in this context that rule 419 on which the respondent's motion is based should be considered. In my view, this rule could not apply here since there is no action. Rule 419 clearly assumes the existence of an "action", which is defined as follows in rule 2:
"2(1) In these Rules, unless the contrary otherwise appears,
. . . . .
'action' means a proceeding in the Trial Division
other than an appeal
, an application
or an originating motion
, and includes such a proceeding by or against the Crown or any person acting for or on behalf of the Crown; (action) ..." (my emphasis)
[4]
Moreover, rule 419 permits any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out. The definition of "pleading" in rule 2 also assumes the existence of an action:
"'pleading' means any document whereby an action in the Trial Division was initiated or a claim in such an action was defined, and any document, whereby a claim was defended or answered, and includes a confession of judgment and a discontinuance; (plaidoirie écrite) ..."
[5]
Thus, I do not feel that applying rule 419 here without regard for the definitions in rule 2, supra, can constitute an application "with necessary modifications" within the meaning of rule 705(3). At any rate, such an application of rule 419, the spirit of which is to dispose of certain actions rapidly before trial, would imply an amendment of the rule that I do not feel would be "reasonably appropriate" in the light of the summary nature of the procedure already laid down elsewhere for considering and disposing of the application under s. 57 of the
Trade Marks Act
.
[6]
Even if I agreed to consider this motion from the point of view of rule 419, I would, since paragraph (1)(a) of that rule is concerned, have to dismiss or ignore the evidence referred to in support of this motion. In any event, the respondent has not convinced me, at this style, that the applicant is not a "person interested" within the meaning of ss. 2 and 57 of the
Trade Marks Act
. It is well established that a motion to strike should succeed only in plain and obvious cases, which is not the case here. On the contrary, it seems to me there is serious cause for discussion, and I feel that it is more appropriate, in order to permit an enlightened decision on the issue, to apply the summary procedure provided for in rules 704 and 705.
[7]
Consequently, the application for an order pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) will be dismissed.
[8]
With respect to 2. above, the number and the nature of the affidavits filed by the applicant justify that the following limited extensions of time which, in my view, do not defeat the summary nature of the proceeding be granted to the respondent:
a) a delay until May 23, 1991 to file its reply; and
b) a delay until June 27, 1991 to file any affidavits which it proposes to put before the Court before the hearing.
[9]
Finally, with respect to 3. above, the requested leave to file and serve this motion and the supporting affidavit upon the applicant must be granted.
[10]
It will be ordered accordingly on a separate document and there will be no costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm
[End of document]