 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Can. (M.C.I.) v. Neubauer (2015), 472 F.T.R. 132 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2015] F.T.R. TBEd. MR.017 
 
 
 
 The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (applicant) v. Norbert Neubauer, Szilvia Neubauerne Lakatos (a.k.a. Norbertne Neubauer), Milan Norbert Neubauer and Antal Lakatos (respondents) 
 
 (IMM-5660-13; 2015 FC 260) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Neubauer et al. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Diner, J. 
 
 March 2, 2015. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The respondents were a family from Hungary who feared that they would be discriminated against, harassed and harmed on account of their Roma ethnicity. The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board determined that they were Convention refugees. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application and remitted the matter to be decided by another member in accordance with the court's reasons. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.2 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugee and persons in need of protection - Persecution - Protection of country of nationality or citizenship (internal flight alternative) - The respondents were a family from Hungary who feared that they would be discriminated against, harassed and harmed on account of their Roma ethnicity - The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board determined that they were Convention refugees - The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review - The Federal Court allowed the application and remitted the matter to be decided by another member - Allowing a claimant to "somewhat rebut" a presumption of state protection (or shifting the onus entirely) as occurred here was to apply a decidedly lower legal threshold than requiring them to provide "clear and convincing evidence" that proved, on a balance of probabilities, that state protection was inadequate (the proper legal test) - While the Board stated that given Hungary's status as a democracy, it created a strong presumption that state protection would be forthcoming and acknowledged that adequacy of protection, rather than effectiveness or perfection, was what was required of the state, it conducted no analysis of the evidence that it found rebutted the presumption of state protection - As a result, it was unclear which legal standard the Board actually applied, and the manner in which they applied it. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Jocelyn Espejo-Clarke, for the applicant; 
 
 Daisy McCabe-Lokos, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 Rochon Genova LLP, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This case was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on December 10, 2014, by Diner, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following decision on March 2, 2015. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Diner, J. 
 : This is an application for judicial review brought by the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA], of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division [RPD] of the Immigration and Refugee Board [IRB], dated August 28, 2013 (and rendered orally July 29, 2013), in which the Board determined that the Respondents were Convention refugees. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  This application for judicial review should be allowed for the reasons set out below. 
 
 
 
 I.  
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The Respondents (the principal Respondent along with his wife, son, and father-in-law) are a family from Hungary who fear that they will be discriminated against, harassed and harmed on account of their Roma ethnicity. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The Respondents submit that they were subject to discrimination in the workplace, in schools, in seeking employment, in housing, in healthcare, on public transportation, in stores, and in obtaining loans. As the residents of a predominantly Roma apartment complex, the Hungarian Guards would consistently harass and intimidate them, yelling epithets like "dirty gypsy you will die" and assaulting them on occasion. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  In particular, Mr. Neubauer alleges three recent incidents of physical violence. In November 2008, he was hit by a car on a crosswalk by a big bald man with a swastika tattoo, who jumped out of his car and started yelling at him. He claims that he called the police but no report was made. In November 2009, the Respondents' door was broken down in the middle of the night while they were asleep, and they "got into a brawl". Again, they called the police but were told, "just shut up stinky gypsy." The police did not press charges. Further, in November 2010, Mr. Neubauer was surrounded by a group of Hungarian Guards one night as he approached his apartment complex on his way home from work. They grabbed his clothes and shoved him. Police officers were walking by and did nothing about it, telling him that he should be lucky to be alive (CTR, p 22). 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Decision 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The RPD found the Respondents to be Convention refugees. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Board began by finding that the allegations of the Respondents in the narrative were true, citing the presumption from  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, that a claimant's account is to be believed unless there is a reason to doubt their truthfulness. It then noted that it appears that the Respondents had received at least some level of education, healthcare, and employment, but inconsistencies regarding their claims of discrimination in these areas were insufficient to impugn their overall credibility or the documentary evidence. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The Board went on to assess the issue of state protection. It acknowledged that Hungary is a democracy, and therefore the presumption of state protection was a strong one, but ultimately concluded: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 III.  
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  This judicial review raises the following issues: 
 
 
 
 a) Did the Board apply the proper test for state protection? 
 
 
 
 b) Was the decision was reasonable? 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Standard of Review 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Whether the Board applied the proper test for state protection is reviewable on a standard of correctness ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The application of the law to the facts is reviewed on a standard of reasonableness ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). Whether the hardship encountered by the Respondents amounts to persecution and whether there is adequate state protection for the Respondents in Hungary are both questions of mixed fact and law and are reviewable on a standard of reasonableness ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the Court is concerned with 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Positions of the Parties 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The Applicant argues that the Board: (i) misstated the test for state protection; (ii) misapplied the standard of proof on state protection; (iii) failed to assess all the evidence; (iv) failed to analyze or explain why it concluded that the discrimination amounted to persecution; and (v) failed to provide adequate reasons. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  In response, the Respondents submit that the decision of the Board is transparent, thorough, intelligible and reasonable. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  First, the Respondents submit that the Board stated the correct test for state protection and applied the correct standard of proof. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Second, the Respondents submit that the Board did not ignore the personal experiences of the Respondents or contrary evidence. Given the presumption that the Board has considered all the evidence, it is assumed that the Board had full regard to all the personal and documentary evidence before it, and weighed it before making its findings on state protection. In addition, the Board explicitly acknowledged the US Department of State Report and aspects of Hungary's make up that favour a finding of adequate state protection. The Board followed the rule that each case is decided on its own merits, and reached a reasonable conclusion based on the evidence before it. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Third, the Respondents submit that the Board analyzed the issue of persecution. The Board accepted that the Respondents were credible, referred to the Respondents' narrative, and reasonably held that the cumulative events referred to therein amounted to persecution. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Finally, the Respondents submit that the Board provided adequate reasons. The Board is required to render oral decisions where possible ( 
 Refugee Protection Division Rules 
 , SOR/2012-256, subrule 10(8)), and as such, the Court should not take a microscopic approach to the assessment so long as it is clear how the Board came to its conclusion. The reasons meet the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  and  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED criterion as they provide a clear basis for the reasoning behind the decision. Further, the Board referred to key pieces of evidence on which it relied, as well as case law and IRB documents. 
 
 
 
 VI.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 A.  
 Did the RPD apply the correct legal test for state protection? 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  I agree with Applicant's position that it is unclear whether the Board applied the correct legal test for state protection. As noted  in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, a claimant seeking refugee protection must provide  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. When the proper test for state protection has been misunderstood by the Board, it is not this Court's role to reweigh the evidence, as it cannot anticipate how the Board would have concluded had it properly assessed the evidence ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The Board properly stated the standard of proof for rebutting the presumption of state protection at some points in the decision. For example, FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [21] 
  However, despite the accurate articulation of the test noted above, the Board also communicated a version of the test which lowered the burden of proof: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [22] 
  This is the version of the test the Board appears to have applied, as the error was further repeated in its conclusion: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [23] 
  The correct application of the test for state protection is of considerable importance, since the availability of state protection is determinative of a refugee claim in circumstances when the presumption has not been rebutted ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  In my view, allowing a claimant to "somewhat rebut" a presumption of state protection (or shifting the onus entirely) is to apply a decidedly lower legal threshold than requiring them to provide "clear and convincing evidence" that proves, on a balance of probabilities, that state protection is inadequate ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). Even though this Court has held that a test need not be precisely phrased by the Board if the gist of the test is apparent, it has chosen to remit the matter in circumstances in which the wrong test has been applied, or it is unclear as to which test has been applied ( 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  While the Board in this case stated that given Hungary's status as a democracy, it created a strong presumption that state protection would be forthcoming (CTR, p 8) and acknowledged that adequacy of protection, rather than effectiveness or perfection, is what is required of the state (CTR, p 6), it conducted no analysis of the evidence that it found rebutted the presumption of state protection. As a consequence, it is unclear which legal standard the Board actually applied, and the manner in which they applied it. In finding this error, I find the words of 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  instructive: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [26] 
  In acknowledging the reviewable error above, I make no comment on the substantive merits of the Respondents' case. Indeed, I recently found in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, that the Board's conclusion that the presumption of state protection in Hungary was rebutted was a reasonable one. However, unlike the case at bar, the reasons in that case cited the objective documentary evidence the Board relied on and set out the correct test, enabling the Court to discern that the test had been correctly applied. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  I allow the Application and remit the matter to be decided by another member in accordance with these reasons. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [28] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
  this application for judicial review is allowed. No question of general importance warranting certification was raised. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Jana A. Andersen/nmg 
 
 
 
 ANNEX 
 
 
 
 Section 96 of  
 IRPA 
 
 
 
 Convention refugee 
 
 
 
 96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion, 
 
 
 
 (a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or 
 
 
 
 (b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 Définition de « réfugié 
 
 
 
 96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques: 
 
 
 
 a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays; 
 
 
 
 b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner. 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




