 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conille v. Can. (M.C.I.) (1998), 159 F.T.R. 215 (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 .................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [1998] F.T.R. TBEd. NO.041 
 
 
 
 Jean Conille (demandeur) v. Le Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration (défendeur) 
 
 (T-1063-98) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Conille v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court of Canada 
 
 Trial Division 
 
 Tremblay-Lamer, J. 
 
 October 30, 1998. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 Conille filed an application for citizenship on August 7, 1995. An investigation by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service had not been completed and the citizenship application had not been processed. Conille applied for mandamus to direct the Minister to process his citizenship application.  
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, allowed the application. Conille met the requirements for the issuance of a writ of mandamus. 
 
 
 
 Administrative Law - Topic 3503 
 
 Judicial review - Mandamus - When avail­able - [See both  
 Aliens - Topic 2503 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2503 
 
 Naturalization - Duty of authorities to process applications - Conille filed an application for citizenship on August 7, 1995 - An investigation by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) had not been completed and the citizenship application had not been processed - Con­ille applied for mandamus to direct the Minister to process his citizenship applica­tion - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the application where Conille met the requirements for the issuance of a writ of mandamus - The delay in processing Conille's citizenship application was unreasonable and amounted to an implied refusal - The court also held that CSIS usurped the decision making powers conferred on the Registrar and the citizenship judge. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 2503 
 
 Naturalization - Duty of authorities to process applications - Conille filed an application for citizenship on August 7, 1995 - An investigation by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) had not been completed and the citizenship application had not been processed - Con­ille applied for mandamus to direct the Minister to process his citizenship applica­tion - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the application - The Registrar was to inform CSIS that unless justification for continuing the investiga­tion was provided as soon as the Registrar considered appropriate, the investigation would be considered closed - If there were serious reasons to justify continuing the investigation, the Registrar was to inform Conille that the investigation was continu­ing and the processing of his application was suspended until the investigation was completed - If there were no serious rea­sons or a reply was not received, the Reg­istrar was to assume that the investigation was closed and forward the application to the citizenship judge - See paragraphs 32 to 35. 
 
 
 
 National Security - Topic 1108 
 
 Canadian Security Intelligence Service - Security intelligence review committee - Investigation of security threats - Aliens - [See both  
 Aliens - Topic 2503 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Jean-Ernest Pierre and Jean Casimir, for the applicant; 
 
 Pascale-Catherine Guay and Josée Paquin, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Jean-Ernest Pierre, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant; 
 
 Morris Rosenberg, Deputy Attorney Gen­eral of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on October 13, 1998, at Montreal, Quebec, before Tremblay-Lamer, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on October 30, 1998. 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Tremblay-Lamer, J. 
  [Translation]: The applicant, Jean Édouard Conille, has filed an application for judicial review under s. 18 of the  
 Federal Court Act 
  [see footnote 1] seeking a writ of mandamus to direct the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (the "Minister") to process the application for citizenship he filed on August 7, 1995, under the  
 Citizenship Act 
  [see footnote 2] (the " 
 Act 
 "). 
 
 
 
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicant comes from Haiti, and was born in 1967. He arrived in Canada in 1973 as a permanent resident. On November 18, 1991, he made his first application for citizenship, which was refused on June 15, 1995 by the citizenship judge Elizabeth Wilcock. The applicant did not meet the residence requirement set out in s. 5(1) of the  
 Act 
  in that he had been under a probation order for a period of three years ending on August 3, 1991, and in accordance with s. 21 of the  
 Act 
  that period could not be taken into account in calculating the length of residence in Canada. The period of probation had been imposed on the applicant after he was convicted of causing death by criminal negligence, on August 3, 1988, contrary to ss. 202 and 203 of the  
 Criminal Code 
 . [see footnote 3] 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  On August 7, 1995, the applicant made a new application for citizenship which has not yet received a response. Accordingly, the purpose of this application for judicial review is to obtain an order directing the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration to process the application for citizenship. 
 
 
 
 The Parties' Arguments 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The applicant contends, first, that the three-year delay since the application for citizenship was made on August 7, 1995, is unreasonable. In his view, the investigation concerning him, which is cited as justification for the delay in processing his case, should have started in December 1994, although the application in question here was filed in August 1995. Under the regulatory procedure, requests for investigations are submitted when the application for citizenship is filed, and do not take three years to be completed. This delay does not comply with the provisions of the  
 Act 
 , which requires, in mandatory language, that applications be processed promptly and transparently. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  In addition, the applicant alleges that the processing of complaints is not legally subject to the authorization of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service ("CSIS") and accordingly that the powers conferred on the registrar and the citizenship judge have been usurped. The respondent, on the other hand, asserts that the applicant's citizenship application cannot be examined as long as CSIS has not given its authorization. In the applicant's view, this amounts to an unauthorized and illegal delegation of power, since CSIS has no statutory power to authorize or not authorize a citizenship application. Sections 14 and 15 of the  
 Canadian Security Intelligence Service Act 
  [see footnote 4] only gives CSIS powers to advise the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  With respect to the delegation of power, the respondent contends that CSIS is involved only as an adviser, supplying the results of its investigation. As set out in the record, the decision-making power is not exercised by CSIS. 
 
 
 
 Issue 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Is issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration to process the applicant's citizenship application justified having regard to the allegations of unreasonable delay and usurpation of powers by CSIS? 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  We need only briefly recall that issuance of a writ of mandamus is subject to the following conditions precedent: 
 
 
 
 (1) there is a public legal duty to the applicant to act; 
 
 
 
 (2) the duty must be owed to the applicant; 
 
 
 
 (3) there is a clear right to the performance of that duty, in particular: 
 
 
 
 (a) the applicant has satisfied all conditions precedent giving rise to the duty; 
 
 
 
 (b) there was a prior demand for performance of the duty, a reasonable time to comply with the demand, and a subsequent refusal which can be either expressed or implied, e.g. unreasonable delay; and 
 
 
 
 (4) there is no other adequate remedy. [see footnote 5] 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  Processing of citizenship applications is governed by the  
 Act 
  and the  
 Citizenship Regulations 
  [see footnote 6], 1993 (the " 
 Regulations 
 "). In accordance with s. 5(1) of the  
 Act 
 , the Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who meets the requirements. Section 5(1) reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "5(1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who 
 
 
 
 (a) makes application for citizenship; 
 
 
 
 (b) is eighteen years of age or over; 
 
 
 
 (c) has been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence, has not ceased since such admission to be a permanent resident pursuant to section 24 of the Immigration Act, and has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada calculated in the following manner: 
 
 
 
 (i) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada before his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one-half of a day of residence, and 
 
 
 
 (ii) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada after his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one day of residence; 
 
 
 
 (d) has an adequate knowledge of one of the official languages of Canada; 
 
 
 
 (e) has an adequate knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship; and 
 
 
 
 (f) is not under a deportation order and is not the subject of a declaration by the Governor-in-Council made pursuant to section 20." 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Section 11 of the  
 Regulations 
  provides that when a citizenship application is filed the registrar is responsible for causing the inquiries necessary for the application of the  
 Act 
  to be commenced. Section 11 of the  
 Regulations 
  provides: 
 
 
 
 "11(1) On receipt of an application made in accordance with subsection 3(1), 6(1), 7(1) or 8(1), the registrar shall cause to be commenced the inquiries necessary to determine whether the person in respect of whom the application is made meets the requirements of the Act and these Regulations with respect to the application." 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The inquiries referred to in s. 11 are of three types: 
 
 
 
 (a) inquiries under s. 5(1) to ascertain that applicants have permanent resident status; 
 
 
 
 (b) inquiries under s. 5(1)(f) concerning the declaration by the Governor-in-Council pursuant to s. 20 to the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS); and 
 
 
 
 (c) inquiries under ss. 21 and 22 of the  
 Act 
  relating to the whether the person is under a probation order, is a paroled inmate or is imprisoned. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  After completion of the inquiries commenced, the registrar shall refer the applications to the citizenship judge for consideration in accordance with s. 11(5) of the  
 Regulations 
 . 
 
 
 
 "11(5) After completion of the inquiries commenced pursuant to subsection (1), the registrar shall 
 
 
 
 (a) in the case of an application and materials filed with a citizenship officer in accordance with subsection 3(1), or forwarded to the registrar under subsection 3(3), request the citizenship officer with whom the application and materials have been filed or to whom they have been forwarded under subsection 3(5) to refer the application and materials to a citizenship judge for consideration; and 
 
 
 
 (b) in the case of an application and materials filed under subsection 6(1), 7(1) or 8(1), forward the application and materials to a citizenship officer of the citizenship court that the registrar considers appropriate in the circumstances, and request the citizenship officer to refer the application and materials to a citizenship judge for consideration." 
 
 
 
 No time limit is provided for completing these inquiries. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Section 14 of the  
 Act 
  sets out the procedure and time limits for processing the case once it has been referred to the judge for consideration. 
 
 
 
 "14(1) An application for 
 
 
 
 (a) a grant of citizenship under subsection 5(1), 
 
 
 
 (b) a retention of citizenship under section 8, 
 
 
 
 (c) a renunciation of citizenship under subsection 9(1), or 
 
 
 
 (d) a resumption of citizenship under subsection 11(1) 
 
 
 
 shall be considered by a citizenship judge who shall, within sixty days of the day the application was referred to the judge, determine whether or not the person who made the application meets the requirements of this Act and the regulations with respect to the application. 
 
 
 
 "Interruption of proceedings 
 
 
 
 "(1.1) Where an applicant is a permanent resident who is the subject of an inquiry under the Immigration Act, the citizenship judge may not make a determination under subsection (1) until there has been a final determination whether, for the purposes of that Act, a removal order shall be made against that applicant. 
 
 
 
 "Definitions 
 
 
 
 "(1.2) The expressions 'permanent resident' and 'removal order' in subsection (1.1) have the meanings assigned to those expressions by subsection 2(1) of the Immigration Act. 
 
 
 
 "Advice to Minister 
 
 
 
 "(2) Forthwith after making a determination under subsection (1) in respect of an application referred to therein but subject to section 15, the citizenship judge shall approve or not approve the application in accordance with his determination, notify the Minister accordingly and provide the Minister with the reasons therefor. 
 
 
 
 "Notice to applicant 
 
 
 
 "(3) Where a citizenship judge does not approve an application under subsection (2), the judge shall forthwith notify the applicant of his decision, of the reasons therefor and of the right to appeal. 
 
 
 
 "Sufficiency 
 
 
 
 "(4) A notice referred to in subsection (3) is sufficient if it is sent by registered mail to the applicant at his latest known address." 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Thus, when the citizenship judge finds that the application meets the requirements, the Minister "shall" grant citizenship to any person who meets the requirements therefor. Accordingly, in the instant case, there is a public legal duty owed to the applicant where the requirements are met. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  In the instant case, the applicant filed a citizenship application on August 7, 1995, and his application has still not been processed three years later. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The respondent contends that the registrar cannot act as long as the inquiries have not been completed. Accordingly, there is no legal obligation to act as long as the investigation has not been concluded, and consequently issuance of mandamus cannot be justified. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  On this point, the respondent bases his argument on  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 . [see footnote 7] In that case, the applicant  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  was seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondent to proceed with the processing of his case as soon as possible. Lee had asked that his application be processed urgently, and this memorandum had been placed on his file. After obtaining the results of the RCMP investigation concerning his criminal record, the registry had forwarded the file to CSIS on April 11, 1986. On June 26, 1987, CSIS informed the registry that the investigation was still ongoing and that the results were not yet available. One year had passed since the applicant applied for citizenship. Jerome dismissed the application for mandamus, stating that the registrar was not in a position to act as long as the investigation was ongoing: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Certainly, some types of investigations may delay processing of citizenship applications. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Can they, however, justify an application being indefinitely suspended? In my view, when an applicant prima facie meets the requirements listed in s. 5(1) of the  
 Act 
 , and there is a demand for performance, the authorities involved have a duty to act. In the instant case, the record does not show that the applicant is under a deportation order and he is no longer the subject of a declaration by the Governor-in-Council made pursuant to s. 20. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  It is too easy to argue, as does the respondent, that the registrar has no legal obligation to act as long as the inquiries have not been completed. By that reckoning, an investigation could go on indefinitely and the registrar would never have a duty to act. The difficulty lies essentially in the fact that there is no time limit provided in the  
 Regulations 
  for completing these inquiries. In fact, the source of the problem is a defective statutory framework. For one thing, the powers of the registrar to direct that an investigation be conducted in order to ascertain that the requirements of the  
 Act 
  have been met are not subject to any temporal or pragmatic parameters, apart from the obligation to await completion of the inquiries provided for in s. 11 of the  
 Regulations 
 , and for another, no time limits are placed on the powers of the investigators, in this instance CSIS. Given these circumstances, the processing time may extend well beond the time required for conducting the investigation. At what point can that time be regarded as unreasonable? 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The reasonableness of the time taken to perform a statutory obligation has been examined in several cases:  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  the Alberta Supreme Court examined the question of whether a delay in performing a duty warranted issuance of a writ of mandamus. The court dismissed the applicant's case on the ground that the delay was justified because another similar investigation and hearing was under way and the respondent had proceeded reasonably in the performance of its duties, and the delay did not amount to a refusal to perform its duties. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  From the reasons of the court, it appears that three requirements must be met if a delay is to be considered unreasonable: 
 
 
 
 (1) the delay in question has been longer than the nature of the process required, prima facie; 
 
 
 
 (2) the applicant and his counsel are not responsible for the delay; and 
 
 
 
 (3) the authority responsible for the delay has not provided satisfactory justification. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 , [see footnote 12] which the applicant cited in support of his argument, the Federal Court examined an application for a writ of mandamus to direct the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration to process an application for permanent residence in Canada. In that case, processing had been delayed by investigations into the parties' bona fides. The court granted mandamus requiring that a decision be made, on the ground that the responsible authority had not adequately justified the delay. In that situation, unreasonable delay amounted to failure to decide. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [25] 
  When, as it is in this case, an investigation drags on beyond the normal time for this kind of investigation, it is my opinion that the registrar may inform the investigator that he will consider the investigation to be concluded, unless he is informed, as soon as he considers appropriate, that there are serious reasons to justify continuing it. Unless CSIS indicates otherwise as to the importance of confidentiality, procedural fairness demands that the registrar inform the applicant that an investigation is ongoing, delaying a decision on his citizenship application. In most cases, I do not believe that this kind of requirement could jeopardize the result of the investigation since, as in the instant case and in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  [see footnote 14] the applicant is in any event aware that there is an investigation, having brought an application for mandamus in the Federal Court. The applicant would then have an opportunity to initiate other proceedings before the body in question, inter alia through the complaint procedure set out in s. 41 et seq. of the  
 Canadian Security Intelligence Service Act 
 , [see footnote 15] which provides: 
 
 
 
 "41(1) Any person may make a complaint to the Review Committee with respect to any act or thing done by the Service and the Committee shall, subject to subsection (2), investigate the complaint if, 
 
 
 
 (a) the complainant has made a complaint to the Director with respect to that act or thing and the complainant has not received a response within such a period of time as the Committee considers reasonable or is dissatisfied with the response given; and 
 
 
 
 (b) the Committee is satisfied that the complaint is not trivial, frivolous, vexatious or made in bad faith." 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  To allow CSIS to delay the conclusion of its investigation indefinitely, and thereby prevent the registrar from submitting the application to the citizenship judge, amounts, in my view, to usurping the powers conferred on the registrar and the citizenship judge by the  
 Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  It is furthermore not surprising that the affidavit of the respondent's representative, Mr. Payette, refers to the practice of waiting for CSIS  
 authorization 
  in processing complaints. On this point, he says in his affidavit: [see footnote 16] 
 
 
 
 [TRANSLATION] "12. I have been informed by representatives of CSIS that the applicant's case is still being examined. To date, CSIS has never given its authorization in respect of the citizenship application filed by the applicant on August 7, 1995. 
 
 
 
 "13. The applicant's citizenship application cannot be examined as long as CSIS has not given its authorization for that to be done." 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  In addition, the memoranda in the file reiterate that the application is suspended as long as "the clearance has not been finalized". [see footnote 17] 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  The respondent referred to Mr. Payette's cross-examination [see footnote 18] in which he stated that what he meant was checks. He also referred to a memorandum in the file dated December 7, 1995, in which Mr. Payette, on behalf of Mr. Sabourin, told CSIS that processing of the case would be suspended while awaiting advice from CSIS. [see footnote 19] 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  However, having carefully reread the transcript, it appears that Mr. Payette stated several times that he was talking about CSIS giving authorization, and not advice as provided in s. 14 of the  
 Canadian Security Intelligence Service 
 : 
 
 
 
 "14. The Service may 
 
 
 
 (a) advise any minister of the Crown on matters relating to the security of Canada, or 
 
 
 
 (b) provide any minister of the Crown with information relating to security matters or criminal activities, that is relevant to the exercise of any power or the performance of any duty or function by that Minister under the Citizenship Act or the Immigration Act." 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  In my opinion, it is apparent on a balance of probabilities that CSIS has usurped the decision-making powers conferred on the registrar and the citizenship judge. Furthermore, I am of the view that the applicant has satisfied the requirements that must be met in order for a writ of mandamus to be issued. 
 
 
 
 (1) there is a public legal duty to the applicant, which rests on the registrar and the citizenship judge, to determine and process the application in accordance with the  
 Act 
  and the  
 Regulations 
 ; 
 
 
 
 (2) first, the applicant's application satisfies the  
 Act 
  and the  
 Regulations 
  to the extent possible, and second, the time taken by CSIS is unreasonable and amounts to an implied refusal; 
 
 
 
 (3) in the instant case, the applicant has no other remedy. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  This application for judicial review is allowed. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  The registrar shall inform CSIS that unless justification for continuing the investigation is provided as soon as the registrar shall consider appropriate, the investigation will be considered to be closed. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  If there are serious reasons to justify continuing the investigation, the registrar shall then inform the applicant that the investigation is continuing and that processing of his application is suspended until the investigation is completed. 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  If there are no serious reasons or a reply is not received, the registrar shall, on the assumption that the investigation is closed, forward the application to a citizenship judge for the citizenship judge to consider the application and decide it on the merits. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Angela E. McKay/pdk 
 
 
 
 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 5.	 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 

