[1]
Noël, J.
: The applicants are each represented by separate counsel in these proceedings under the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, S.O.R. 93-133. Apotex Inc. ("Apotex") moves for an order that they be represented by one counsel only, and for an order extending the schedule for the completion of interlocutory matters.
[2]
The facts which have led to this application are as follows. The applicant, Pfizer Canada Inc. ("Pfizer"), holds Notices of Compliance ("NOCs") in respect of specified tablets of cetirizine hydrochloride. On April 7, 1993, Pfizer filed three Form IV Patent Lists ("Patent Lists") pursuant to s. 4(1) of the
Regulations
. The Patent Lists pertain to Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,199,918 ("'918 Patent") which patent relates to cetirizine hydrochloride. The '918 Patent is owned by the second applicant, UCB Pharma, Inc. ("UCB").
[3]
By letter dated January 8, 1996 Apotex forwarded a Notice of Allegation to Pfizer in which it alleged that the '918 Patent is invalid and, in the alternative, that Apotex's intended process for manufacturing cetirizine would not infringe the '918 Patent. Pfizer then applied for an order prohibiting the Minister of National Health and Welfare from issuing a NOC to Apotex. As UCB is the owner of the relevant patent, it was made a party to this application as s. 6(4) of the
Regulations
requires. The Originating Notice of Application names both Pfizer and UCB as applicants.
[4]
In the Originating Notice of Motion, Gowling Strathy & Henderson is listed as solicitors to Pfizer and Leger Robic Richard is listed as solicitors to UCB. By letter dated April 26, 1996 Apotex's counsel informed Francois Grenier of Leger Robic Richard that Apotex would recognize only one firm of solicitors as counsel of record for the applicants. Accordingly, Apotex's counsel advised Mr. Grenier that Apotex proposed to deal only with Gowling Strathy & Henderson and, where appropriate, provide courtesy copies to Mr. Grenier.
[5]
By letter dated April 29, 1996 Mr. Grenier wrote to Apotex's counsel and advised that he and his firm would be acting for UCB and, accordingly, there would be two counsel of record acting on behalf of the applicants.
[6]
By letter dated May 1, 1996, Apotex's counsel informed Mr. Grenier of its view that the applicants were not permitted to be represented by two sets of counsel. By letter dated May 6, 1996, Mr. Grenier informed Apotex's counsel that, pursuant to s. 6(4) of the
Regulations
, UCB was a proper party to the proceeding and had a right to be represented by attorneys of its choice.
[7]
By letter dated May 13, 1996, Apotex's counsel advised Mr. Grenier that, while s. 6(4) of the
Regulations
requires that the owner of a patent be made a party to an application brought under the
Regulations
, this did not necessarily mean that the owner of the patent was to be an applicant. Apotex's counsel advised Mr. Grenier that, if the owner is to be added as a party to the proceeding, it may be added as an applicant provided that it is represented by the same counsel representing the First Person or, alternatively, if it wished to be represented by its own counsel, it should be added as a respondent.
[8]
By letter dated September 5, 1996 Mr. Grenier forwarded to Apotex's counsel three affidavits which were being served on behalf of UCB. By letter of the same date, G.A. Macklin of Gowling Strathy & Henderson served, on behalf of Pfizer, three different affidavits. By letter dated December 19, 1996 Mr. Grenier served, on behalf of UCB, a further affidavit. By letter of the same date, Ms. Emma Grell of Gowling Strathy and Henderson served, on behalf of Pfizer, two further affidavits.
[9]
Finally, by letter dated December 21, 1996 Apotex's counsel wrote to Ms. Grell and Mr. Grenier and again advised that Apotex's counsel was not prepared to recognize two counsel acting for the applicants. In particular, Apotex's counsel indicated that it was not prepared to accept affidavit material emanating from two different sources on behalf of the applicants. Apotex's counsel also pointed out that UCB was not a First Person pursuant to the
Regulations
, and therefore, had no right to challenge the Notice of Allegation served by Apotex.
[10]
On February 6, 1997 Apotex filed the present motion for an order that the applicants be represented by one counsel only.
[11]
In support of its application, Apotex argues that Pfizer is the First Person under the
Regulations
and only it is entitled to the relief sought in the application. Section 6(1) of the
Regulations
only refers to the right of a First Person to apply for a prohibition order. Apotex contends that Pfizer's and UCB's counsel are each attempting to lead a case against it and that it is being asked to respond to two cases in one proceeding. It adds that Pfizer's and UCB's interests in these proceedings are identical, and that they should be represented by one set of counsel.
[12]
The application must be dismissed. Apotex correctly states that Pfizer is the only First Person, that only it was entitled to be served with the Notice of Allegation, to commence the within proceeding and to the relief sought. Nevertheless, the
Regulations
require that UCB as the owner of the patent in issue be made a party to the proceedings. The obvious reason for this requirement is to insure that, where a First Person is not the owner of the relevant patent, the patentee will also be bound by the outcome of prohibition proceedings under the
Regulations
. In seeking to preserve its rights as the owner of the patent in issue, the patentee is obviously entitled to be represented by counsel of its choice, and I can see no basis for an order that would have the effect of talking away that right. [see footnote 1]
[13]
That being said, it is clear that both Pfizer and UCB are pursuing the same interests. It is also clear that the First Person holds the primary role in this regard as only it is entitled to initiate the prohibition proceedings and only it is entitled to the relief sought.
[14]
Keeping this in mind, a First Person and a patentee, if they should be represented by separate counsel, cannot put a Second Person through the task of responding to two independently run cases in one proceeding. They must coordinate their efforts to avoid duplication on any issue of fact and law which they wish to pursue so that a Second Person is not put to the task and expense of responding to the same issue more than once. That is a simple matter of fairness, common sense and cost efficiency from both the court's and the parties' perspective. To the extent that Apotex is in a position to demonstrate that the applicants are abusing their status as dual applicants, it should seek the appropriate remedy.
[15]
The application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
Footnotes
1.	I do not believe that the case law referred to by counsel for Apotex during the hearing is of any assistance to it as UCB did not choose to join these proceedings but was compelled by law to do so. This is not a case involving parties who choose to come before the court as co-plaintiffs. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as applied by the Supreme Court of British Columbia in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.)).
[End of document]