 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2756-3105 Que. Inc. v. MNR (1997), 130 F.T.R. 47 (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 .................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [1997] F.T.R. TBEd. JA.009 
 
 
 
 Dans l'affaire de la Loi de l'impôt sur le revenu, 
 
 
 
 et 
 
 
 
 Dans l'affaire d'une cotisation ou des cotisations établies par le ministre du Revenu national en vertu d'une ou plusieurs des lois suivantes: la Loi de l'impôt sur le revenu, le Régime de pensions du Canada et la Loi sur l'assurance-chômage. 
 
 
 
 114509 Canada Inc. (débitrice-saisie) v. 2756-3105 Québec Inc. (opposante) 
 
 (ITA-10586-95) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: 2756-3105 Québec Inc. v. Ministre du Revenu national 
 
 
 
 Federal Court of Canada 
 
 Trial Division 
 
 Morneau, Prothonotary 
 
 January 10, 1997. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Minister of National Revenue stated by certificate that 114509 Canada Inc. was indebted to it. The certificate was registered in Federal Court and had the effect of a judgment of the court. The Minister started compulsory execution by having the court issue a writ of fieri facias against 114509. 2756-3105 Québec Inc. objected, invoked art. 597 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Que.) and filed "a notice of third party motion" to oppose the seizure in execution of movable property on the ground that it, and no one else, was the owner of the property seized. On hearing day, both the Minister and 2756-3105 indicated that they intended to challenge the Prothonotary's jurisdiction to hear the motion. The Prothonotary issued an order postponing the hearing of the motion and setting rules for the presentation of argument on the challenge of jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 A Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that a Prothonotary of the court had jurisdiction to hear the motion. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 2523 
 
 Registrars and prothonotaries - Jurisdiction - Interlocutory applications - Rule 336(1)(g) of the Federal Court Rules gave the Prothonotary jurisdiction to dispose of "any interlocutory application" - A Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that a motion to oppose a seizure brought pursuant to art. 597 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Que.) was an "interlocutory application" and that a Prothonotary of the court had jurisdiction to dispose of it - See paragraphs 24 to 34. 
 
 
 
 Practice - Topic 3055 
 
 Applications and motions - General - What constitutes an interlocutory application or motion - A Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, discussed what constituted an interlocutory motion and held "that an interlocutory motion is one which is incidental to the judgment, whether made before or after the judgment is rendered and also regardless of the possible outcome of the order to be made on the rights of the parties." - See paragraphs 12 to 22. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Code of Civil Procedure (Que.), R.S.Q. 1977, c. C-25, art. 597 [para. 1]. 
 
 Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, sect. 56(4) [para. 24, footnote 14]. 
 
 Federal Court Rules, rule 2 [footnote 9]; rule 321.1(1) [para. 31, footnote 24]; rule 336(1)(e) [para. 33, footnote 25]; rule 336(1)(g) [para. 12]. 
 
 Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985 (5th Supp.), c. 1, sect. 223(2), sect. 223(3) [para. 3, footnote 1]. 
 
 
 
 Authors and Works Noticed: 
 
 Barreau du Québec, Cours du service de la formation permanente, Le Code de procédure civile et ses plus récents amendements, pp. 120 [para. 28, footnote 20]; 121 [para. 29, footnote 21]; 161 [para. 30, footnote 22]. 
 
 Jowitt, The Dictionary of English Law (2nd Ed. 1977) [para. 21, footnotes 11, 13]. 
 
 Osborn, Concise Law Dictionary (8th Ed. 1993) [para. 21, footnotes 12, 13]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Josée Paquin, for Her Majesty The Queen; 
 
 Adélia Ferreira, for the objector. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 George Thomson, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montréal, Québec, for Her Majesty The Queen; 
 
 Landreville, Ferreira, Montréal, Québec, for the objector. 
 
 
 
 This matter was heard at Montréal, Québec, on November 4, 1996, by Morneau, Prothonotary, of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision at Montréal, Québec, on January 10, 1997. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Morneau, Prothonotary 
 : The question in the case at bar is whether a prothonotary of this court has jurisdiction to hear a motion to oppose a seizure in execution of movable property made pursuant to art. 597 of the Quebec  
 Code of Civil Procedure 
  (a motion to oppose). 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  I said at the outset that I had come to the conclusion that a prothonotary of this court has jurisdiction to hear such a motion. 
 
 
 
 Background 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  On November 22, 1995 the judgment creditor ("the creditor") stated by certificate that the judgment debtor was indebted to it. The certificate was registered in this court on the same day. This allowed the creditor to consider, pursuant to s. 223 of the  
 Income Tax Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985 (5th Supp.), c. 1, as amended [see footnote 1], that it had a judgment of this court against the debtor in an amount essentially equivalent to the amount stated in the certificate. The creditor could therefore at once begin compulsory execution measures giving effect to the said judgment. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  That is what it did, again on November 22, 1995, by having the court issue a writ of fieri facias. On December 20, 1995 the creditor, having in the meantime run into certain problems [see footnote 2], proceeded to garnish certain movable property. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  However, on April 18, 1996 the objector filed a notice of a third party motion to oppose the seizure in execution of movable property [see footnote 3] on the ground that it, and no one else, was owner of the property attached. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  This motion to oppose was initially due for presentation on April 22, 1996. It was delayed by consent several times and the hearing on it finally began on November 4, 1996. It was then that, at the start of the hearing, counsel acting for the creditor and counsel acting for the objector indicated to the court that they both intended to challenge the prothonotary's jurisdiction to hear the motion [see footnote 4]. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  It was then agreed that the question of jurisdiction would be argued first. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  On November 5, 1996 I issued the following order: 
 
 
 
 [TRANSLATION] "This third party motion to oppose the seizure in execution of movable property is postponed sine die as the judgment creditor and third party objector intend to challenge the jurisdiction of a Prothonotary of this court to hear such a motion to oppose and at my request this absence of jurisdiction will be argued first. 
 
 
 
 "For the purposes of this preliminary argument the parties have 30 days from the date of this order to submit their written pleadings to the registry of this court. In that submission to the registry they may indicate whether they need an opportunity to make their submissions orally in addition to their written pleadings. If so, they will submit a notice of presentation on this preliminary point. If an oral hearing is not requested by one or other of the parties, the question of a lack of jurisdiction will then be the subject of an order based on the written submissions." 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The creditor alone submitted the written pleadings at the proper time, but without requesting an oral hearing. Sometime after the deadline stated in the aforementioned order, the objector indicated by letter that it did not intend to make submissions or to request an oral hearing. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The question of jurisdiction at issue was thus presented without the court having the benefit of arguments in opposition to those of the creditor. That is not a very desirable situation, although no blame can attach to the creditor in this regard. 
 
 
 
 Points At Issue 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  It seems to the court that two questions arise here, namely: 
 
 
 
 1. What is an interlocutory application or motion? 
 
 
 
 2. Can a motion to oppose be seen as an interlocutory motion? 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 1. What is an interlocutory application or motion? 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Section 336(1)(g) of the  
 Federal Court Rules 
  ("the  
 Rules 
 ") provide that a Prothonotary shall have the power to dispose of 
 
 
 
 "(g) ... any interlocutory application ..." [see footnote 5] 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  However, the  
 Rules 
  do not define what is meant by this expression. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Moreover, there does not appear to have been any discussion in this court to date in which the prothonotary's jurisdiction under s. 336(1)(g) was considered other than in terms of the possible effects of a motion on the progress of a hearing. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  The cases in which the prothonotary's jurisdiction was raised had to do with motions which certainly fell in the course of a hearing but could potentially terminate the issue between the parties. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  That was the situation in  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  [see footnote 6]. In that case the Associate Chief Justice of this court affirmed on appeal a judgment of my brother Giles [see footnote 7] that the prothonotary had jurisdiction to hear a motion to strike an action pursuant to s. 419(1)(a) of the rules. Without dwelling at length on the point, the Associate Chief Justice nonetheless said: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 [17] 
  The same is true in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. In that case the court had before it an application to determine the amount of damages. It was submitted to my brother Giles that he did not have jurisdiction because the application was not an interlocutory one. He disposed of this objection at 279 as follows: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Similarly, Nadon, J., dismissed an objection to the effect that my brother Hargrave lacked jurisdiction to hear an application to dismiss an action for want of prosecution under rule 440 [see footnote 8]. It was submitted to the court that such an application was "final" since it had the potential to terminate the plaintiff's action. The court refused to classify the application according to its outcome, whether or not the outcome had a final effect on the rights of the parties. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  The court, in my view properly passing over precedents determining whether an application is interlocutory from its potential impact on the parties' rights, said the following at 304 and 305: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [20] 
  It can thus be seen why to date the court has only had to indicate that an interlocutory motion was, under rule 336, " ... simply an application in the course of an action which may well result in the 'final' disposition of an issue" [see footnote 10]. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  In view of these precedents and having in mind the definitions given by  
 Jowitt's Dictionary of English Law 
  [see footnote 11] for the word "interlocutory" and  
 Osborn's Concise Law Dictionary 
  [see footnote 12] for the expression "interlocutory proceeding" [see footnote 13], I think that one may - and for the purposes of this discussion must - revise or restate this definition to indicate that an interlocutory motion is one which is incidental to the judgment, whether made before or after the judgment is rendered and also regardless of the possible outcome of the order to be made on the rights of the parties. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The court therefore cannot take the view for counsel for the creditor when she concluded in paragraph 20 of her written pleadings that: 
 
 
 
 [TRANSLATION] "In short, whether one takes the point of view of Associate Senior Prothonotary Giles (only a motion pendente litis before the final judgment is interlocutory) or that of Muldoon, J. (a motion which may lead to a final determination of the parties' rights is not interlocutory), a motion to oppose a seizure cannot be regarded as an 'interlocutory application' within the meaning of rule 336(1)(g) ..." 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  This leads us to consider the second point at issue. 
 
 
 
 2. Can a motion to oppose be seen as an interlocutory motion? 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  To answer this question we have to determine the nature of a motion to oppose. Counsel for the creditor was undoubtedly right in saying that because of s. 56(4) [see footnote 14] of the  
 Federal Court Act 
  [see footnote 15], the way to do this is by reference to the  
 Code 
 . Relying on a series of cases dating from before the 1994 revision of the  
 Civil Code 
  [see footnote 16], counsel for the creditor maintained that an objection must be treated as originating a new proceeding between the garnisher and the objector. For example, it is true that in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  [see footnote 17], it states that: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 [25] 
  In  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
  [see footnote 18], the primary nature of the opposition proceeding - as compared with the incidental nature of a motion which may be filed in the course of it - is explained as follows: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 However, it appears that the creditor's position on the introductory nature of a motion to oppose cannot now be upheld, since on January 1, 1994 the Quebec legislator substantially altered the  
 Code 
  provisions applicable to the opposition proceeding, as part of the far-ranging revision which was made to the  
 Civil Code 
  at that time [see footnote 19]. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  It appears to the court that the whole purpose of the approach taken and wording adopted by the legislator in this revision was to foreclose the case law relied on by the creditor and make clear the incidental nature of a motion to oppose in connection with the execution of a judgment. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  The first amendment to be noted is that made to art. 564, to be found in the  
 Code 
  in the chapter giving the general rules on compulsory execution. That article now reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "564. Incidental applications relating to the execution of judgments are made by way of a motion in accordance with articles 78 and 88. 
 
 
 
 "Unless otherwise provided, the special clerk is competent to hear such applications if they are not contested." 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  As Charles Belleau notes [see footnote 20], the  
 Act 
  undertook to: 
 
 
 
 [TRANSLATION] "... replace art. 564 which provided that a writ of execution against immovable property from the court of Quebec should be entered in the registry of the Superior Court with a version which first states that 'Incidental applications relating to the execution of judgments are made by way of a motion in accordance with articles 78 and 88' and then confers jurisdiction on the special clerk to hear them if they are not contested." 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  It is clear from the related amendments made by the  
 Act 
  to arts. 598 and 600 to 602 of the  
 Code 
  that the Quebec legislator intended to remove from the opposition procedure its formality and its former originating function and make the opposition simply an incidental motion. As the writer Belleau notes [see footnote 21]: 
 
 
 
 [TRANSLATION] "(B) Other changes to execution against movable property 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 - Significant changes to the procedure for opposing a seizure and sale: henceforth any opposition will be made by motion, (arts. 564 and 598) and, if the seizure was made in a support matter, it will be given priority for hearing and decision (art. 598). The earlier formality requiring a note from the clerk has been removed. If property was seized over which rights have been created by the debtor (e.g. movable hypothec without delivery), the motion to oppose must also be served on the holders of such rights (art. 598). 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 - Repeal of arts. 600 to 602 concerning among other things the procedure for challenging an objection, since the latter takes the form of a motion and this procedure has been challenged under art. 88 (art. 564)." 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  Added to this is the fact that the  
 Code 
  provides that certain remedies are begun by originating motion, but this institution does not apply to the motion to oppose. François Bousquet [see footnote 22] describes as follows the remedies for which the  
 Code 
  has specified this procedure: 
 
 
 
 [TRANSLATION] "The  
 Code of Civil Procedure 
  provides for various types of originating motion: 
 
 
 
 (A) the procedure in effect before January 1, 1994 is retained for: 
 
 
 
 (i) proceedings in family cases (813.3 C.C.P.); 
 
 
 
 (ii) proceedings involving a declaratory judgment (453 C.C.P.); 
 
 
 
 (iii) certain extraordinary remedies (834 et seq. C.C.P.); 
 
 
 
 (iv) small claims (958.1 C.C.P.), class actions (1002 C.C.P.) and so on; 
 
 
 
 (B) originating motions are retained in non-contentious matters (862 C.C.P.); 
 
 
 
 (C) the  
 Code of Civil Procedure 
  lays down a new procedure for an originating motion for 'certain proceedings relating to persons and property' (762 et seq. C.C.P.). 
 
 
 
 Apart from exceptions, this procedure is in two stages, presentation and hearing." 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  A motion to oppose must be seen for the purposes of the  
 Code 
  - and of s. 56(4) of the  
 Federal Court Act 
  [see footnote 23] - as an incidental motion and this explains why no one has required that it be dealt with under the  
 Rules 
  and that the procedure given in rule 321.1 [see footnote 24] for originating motions be followed. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  I conclude from this that a motion to oppose is a motion incidental to the execution of a judgment and thus an interlocutory motion which a prothonotary of this court has jurisdiction to dispose of pursuant to rule 336(1)(g). 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  Finally, it may be noted that contrary to what the creditor suggested at paragraphs 21 and 22 of its submissions, I do not consider that rule 336(1)(e) [see footnote 25] which deals with the court's powers to issue writs of execution must be read as exhausting the prothonotary's powers with respect to the execution of judgments. I think that the concern of the drafters of the  
 Rules 
  in this paragraph was to give precise directions regarding the issuing of writs without thereby limiting the prothonotary's jurisdiction over any other matter involving the execution of judgments. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  The preliminary objection by the creditor and the objector as to my lack of jurisdiction over the objector's motion to oppose is therefore dismissed. 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  The merits of the motion to oppose as such will have to be entered on the regular roll of motions in this court as soon as possible by a joint written application by counsel for the parties (or a unilateral application by one of them if agreement is impossible), unless of course the instant decision is appealed. 
 
 
 
 Order accordingly. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/gs 
 
 
 
 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 1.	Section 223(2) and (3) of that  
 Act 
  reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "223(2) An amount payable by a person (in this section referred to as a 'debtor') that has not been paid or any part of an amount payable by the debtor that has not been paid may be certified by the Minister as an amount payable by the debtor. 
 
 
 
 "(3) On production to the Federal Court, a certificate made under subs. (2) in respect of the debtor shall be registered in the court and when so registered has the same effect, and all proceedings may be taken thereon, as if the certificate were a judgment obtained in the court against the debtor for a debt in the amount certified plus interest thereon to the day of payment as provided by the statute or statutes referred to in subs. (1) under which the amount is payable and, for the purpose of any such proceedings, the certificate shall be deemed to be a judgment of the court against the debtor for a debt due to Her Majesty, enforceable in the amount certified plus interest thereon to the day of payment as provided by that statute or statutes." 
 
 
 
 2.	On December 4, 1995 the creditor in fact had to obtain an order of this court to inter alia have the doors opened. 
 
 
 
 3.	Although this notice of motion does not specify under what article or rule it is filed, it can be taken to have been filed pursuant to art. 597 of the  
 Quebec Code of Civil Procedure 
  ("the  
 Code 
 "). 
 
 
 
 4.	A similar situation arose in another case in January 1996 but the question of jurisdiction was not dealt with at that time since the motion was referred to a judge. 
 
 
 
 5.	For a review of the historical origins of the institution of prothonotary, it is worth consulting the excellent study contained in the reasons of Chief Justice Isaac in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED et seq. However, the ratio of that case does not have to do with the prothonotary's jurisdiction under rule 336 but the grounds of review which the court must consider when it hears a discretionary decision by the Prothonotary on appeal. The prothonotary's powers are laid down in rule 336.  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, sets out the legislative bases of this rule with reference to the  
 Federal Court Act 
 , R.S.C. 1970 (2d Supp.), c. 10. We will be concerned primarily with s. 336(1)(g). The other paragraphs of that rule will be mentioned where necessary. Since s. 319(1) of the  
 Rules 
  provides that any application to the court may be made by motion, it will be convenient to use the phrase "interlocutory motion" in our analysis. 
 
 
 
 6.	Supra, note 5. 
 
 
 
 7.	My brother prothonotary's judgment is to be found at FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 9.	That judgment refused to follow the approach taken in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED In that case an application to rescind an order under rule 330 was supported by an affidavit on belief. As only interlocutory motions may submit such affidavits under rule 332, the court was asked whether the motion to rescind was interlocutory. Accordingly, in that case the court did not have to consider the jurisdiction of a prothonotary of this court under rule 336(1)(g). Considering the potentially final effect of the motion, the court refused to classify it as interlocutory and at 205 introduced the concept of a "terminating motion". I do not think there is any need here to get into the discussion of whether this third type of motion should be considered by the courts. The structure of the  
 Rules 
  appears to deal only with two types of motion: an originating motion and an interlocutory motion. The definition of the word "action" in the  
 Rules 
  supports this conclusion. That definition reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "'action' means a proceeding in the Trial Division other than an appeal, an application  
 or 
  an originating motion, and includes such a proceeding by or against the Crown or any person acting for or on behalf of the Crown ..." (Emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 10.	 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 11.	Quotation taken from  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 12.	Sweet and Maxwell, 8th Ed., 1993. 
 
 
 
 13.	These definitions read as follows: 
 
 
 
 " 
 Interlocutory 
 . A proceeding in an action is said to be interlocutory when it is  
 incidental to the principal object of the action, namely, the judgment 
 . Thus, interlocutory applications in an action include all steps taken for the purpose of assisting either party in the prosecution of his case,  
 whether before or after final judgment 
 ; or of protecting or otherwise dealing with the subject-matter of the action before the rights of the parties are finally determined;  
 or of executing the judgment when obtained 
 . Such are applications for time to take a step (e.g., to deliver a pleading), for discovery, for an interim injunction, for the appointment of a receiver, for obtaining a garnishee order, etc. So an order giving a plaintiff leave to sign judgment is interlocutory, because he must sign judgment before he can issue execution. The question whether an order is interlocutory is of importance with reference to the time during which it may be appealed against ..." (Emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 " 
 interlocutory proceeding 
 . One taken during the course of an action and incidental to the principal object of the action, namely, the judgment. Thus, interlocutory applications in an action include all steps taken for the purpose of assisting either party in the prosecution of his case; or of protecting or otherwise dealing with the subjec matter of the action, or of executing the judgment when obtained." 
 
 
 
 14.	That subsection reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "(4) Every claim made by any person to property seized under a writ of execution or other process issued out of the court, or to the proceeds of the sale of that property, shall, unless otherwise provided by the Rules, be heard and disposed of as nearly as may be according to the procedure applicable to like claims to property seized under similar writs or process issued out of the courts of the province." 
 
 
 
 15.	Supra, note 5. 
 
 
 
 16.	These cases are cited in a footnote on page 6 of counsel for the creditor's written pleadings. 
 
 
 
 17.	(1934), 72 C.S. 348 (Qué.). See also to the same effect  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  (tab 10 in the creditor's written pleadings), pages 8 et seq. 
 
 
 
 18.	[1982] C.P. 154 (Que. Prov. Ct.). 
 
 
 
 19.	Act respecting the implimentation of the reform of the  
 Civil Code 
 , S.Q. 1992, c. 57 ("the  
 Act 
 "). In that  
 Act 
  see in particular ss. 301, 311 and 313 which respectively amend arts. 564, 598 and 600 to 602 of the  
 Code 
 . 
 
 
 
 20.	Charles Belleau, in  
 Le Code de procédure civile et ses plus récents amendements 
 , Barreau du Québec, Cours du Service de la formation permanente, February 1994, at p. 120. 
 
 
 
 21.	Ibid., p. 121. 
 
 
 
 22.	Ibid., p. 161. 
 
 
 
 23.	Supra, note 5. 
 
 
 
 24.	This rule reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "321.1(1) This Rule shall apply to 
 
 
 
 (a) all originating motions, including all motions of an originating nature that the court may entertain pursuant to an Act of Parliament, but excluding any application for judicial review under Part V.1, any motion that is made ex parte and any application that is required to be made by statement of claim; and 
 
 
 
 (b) all motions for an injunction, other than a motion for an interim injunction." 
 
 
 
 25.	That paragraph reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "336(1) Notwithstanding Rule 326(1), a prothonotary shall have power 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (e) to make any order that the court might make granting leave to issue a writ of execution or extending the validity of a writ of execution ..." 
 
 
 

