 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Victor Kroon, Urve Kroon, Alexander Kroon and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 January 6, 1995. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board determined that the applicants were not Convention refugees. The applicants applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1330.5 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Disqualifications - Where claimant has rights of nationals of country other than homeland (Art. 1E) - Kroon was a Russian citizen who lived in Estonia since 1973 - A tribunal found that Kroon was excluded from the definition of Convention refugee under Article 1E of the Convention - Kroon submitted that Article 1E should be confined to cases where an applicant moved from his or her country of nationality to seek refugee status in another country where he or she then resided with similar rights to those of nationals of the second country - He argued that the provision did not apply where he as a Russian national was authorized to reside in Estonia when it was a state within the U.S.S.R., but it had since evolved to be an independent state in which he had fewer rights than originally accorded to him as a resident - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, rejected the argument. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1330.5 
 
 Admission - Refugees - Disqualifications - Where claimant has rights of nationals of country other than homeland (Art. 1E) - Kroon was a Russian citizen who lived in Estonia since 1973 - A tribunal concluded that Kroon was excluded from the definition of Convention refugee under Article 1E of the Convention because of his status in relation to Estonia, and that even if he were not excluded under Article 1E, he could return to Estonia with no more than a mere possibility of persecution - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, held that the tribunal erred when it found that Article 1E applied and then proceeded to consider the merits of the claim - However, the court held that the tribunal did not err in its ultimate conclusion in any manner that would warrant the court's intervention. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, sect. 2(1) [para. 1]; sect. 83(1) [para. 16]. 
 
 
 
 Authors and Works Noticed: 
 
 Grahl-Madsen, Atle, The Status of Refugees in International Law (1966), vol. 1, pp. 262 to 270 [para. 8, footnote 1]. 
 
 Hatheway, James C., The Law of Refugee Status (1991), pp. 189 to 191 [para. 8, footnote 1]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Joan Dawson, for the applicants; 
 
 Gregory A. MacIntosh, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Newfoundland Legal Aid Commission, St. John's, Newfoundland, for the applicants; 
 
 George Thomson, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on June 16, 1994, at St. John's, Newfoundland, before MacKay, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on January 6, 1995. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 MacKay, J. 
 : The applicants, Victor Kroon (the "male applicant"), his wife, Urve Kroon (the "female applicant") and their children, Alexander Kroon and Edgar Kroon, seek an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division, (the "tribunal"), dated May 7, 1993, that the applicants are not Convention refugees within the definition included in s. 2(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 . The panel concluded that although the claimants may subjectively fear persecution in Estonia, what they suffered or might suffer is discrimination at most. Their claims that they face a reasonable chance of persecution are not well-founded. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  With respect to the claims of the female applicant, and the children whose claims were originally said to be dependent upon hers, the tribunal found that the discrimination they faced in Estonia, because of the mixed marriage of the female applicant, an Estonian national, to the male applicant, a Russian national and citizen, but of German origin, did not amount to persecution. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Before the tribunal, evidence of the female applicant's claim independent of that of her husband was introduced and it is independently assessed in the decision of the tribunal which concerns the claims of all four applicants. It and the dependent childrens' claims were included with that of the husband in the originating motion for leave and for judicial review, and the husband and wife both signed a joint affidavit in support of that application. When the matter came on for hearing in St. John's, Newfoundland, counsel argued only one issue, of several raised in written submissions, and that concerned the claim of the male applicant, and counsel, in response to a query by the court, affirmed that no other submissions were to be made with regard to the claim of the female applicant, or that of the male applicant either. In the circumstances I deal with the application by the husband in light of argument at the hearing on behalf of the applicants, treating the claims of his wife and their children as though they are entirely dependent upon that of the male applicant, without any grounds for assessment independently of his claim. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The male applicant is a Russian citizen, a Volga German, of German origin, who was resident in Estonia since moving there with his father in 1973, after living in Kazakhstan where his father had been exiled in 1947 because of his German origin. In Estonia he found that he was mistreated by both Russians, and later by Estonians, because of his German origin and accent and by Estonians because of his Russian background as well. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The tribunal, considering the background of the male applicant and the evidence presented to it, concluded that he should not be returned to Russia because he faces more than a mere possibility of persecution "for reasons which the panel is not obliged to articulate in this decision". However, even if he were not excluded from the definition of Convention refugee under Article 1E of the definition, which the tribunal concluded he was with regard to his status in relation to Estonia, he could return to the latter country with no more than a mere possibility of persecution for Convention reasons, and thus he was not a Convention refugee. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The only issue argued at the hearing of this application, on behalf of the applicants, was that the tribunal erred in its determination that the male applicant was excluded from consideration as a Convention refugee by reason of Article 1E of the U.N. Convention, a provision incorporated in the definition within s. 2(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
  as set out in that definition and in Schedule I to the  
 Act 
 . Article 1E of the Convention provides: 
 
 
 
 "E. This Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent authorities of the country in which he has taken residence as having the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that country." 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  I propose to deal with the applicant's submissions in regard to the finding of the tribunal in relation to Article 1E of the Convention, and to deal in a summary way with the tribunal's assessment, apart from that provision, of the male applicant's claim with which counsel for the respondent also dealt at the hearing of this matter. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The applicant's submissions, made at the hearing of this application, are in essence that the tribunal erred in law in considering the application of Article 1E in the circumstances of this case. In view of the comments of authors on refugee law [see footnote 1] and cases referred to by those authors or determined in Canada [see footnote 2], the applicant urges that the exclusion provision under Article 1E should be strictly construed and should be confined to those cases where an applicant has moved from his or her own country of nationality to seek refugee status in another country where he or she then resides with essentially similar rights to those of nationals of the second country. It is urged the provision has no application in the circumstances of this case where the applicant, as a Russian national and a citizen of the U.S.S.R., was authorized to reside in Estonia when it was a state within the U.S.S.R., but it has since evolved to be an independent state in which the applicant has fewer rights than originally accorded to him as a resident. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  I am not persuaded that the words of Article 1E should be so narrowly applied as the applicant urges, or that the words by their plain meaning can be said to exclude the circumstances of this case. Here, the tribunal, seeking to follow  
 Thambaiyah et al. 
  [see footnote 3], where the circumstances were indeed different, sought to assess whether the applicant would be recognized under the Estonian Constitution and its laws as having basic rights and obligations which attach to nationals of that country. It found, with some important exceptions, that was the case and that in certain key respects the applicant would enjoy, in Estonia, a status comparable to that of Estonian nationals and consistent with international conventions and treaties relating to rights and obligations of individuals. In particular, it found, with advice through the IRB and the Department of External Affairs, that the applicant could be expected to be restored to his rights of residency in Estonia as a registered non-citizen, upon his return, that within a reasonable time he would be entitled to apply for citizenship and in the meantime had a right to remain there with rights similar to most of those enjoyed by citizens. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  In my view, the purpose of Article 1E is to support regular immigration laws of countries in the international community, and within the  
 Immigration Act 
  of this country to support the purposes of that  
 Act 
  and the policies it seeks to legislate, by limiting refugee claims to those who clearly face the threat of persecution. If A faces such a threat in his own country, but is living in another country, with or without refugee status, and there faces no threat of persecution for Convention reasons, or put another way, A there enjoys the same basic rights of status as nationals of the second country, the function of Article 1E is to exclude that person as a potential refugee claimant in a third country. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  In my view, the tribunal did not err in considering whether the claim by the male applicant was excluded from the definition of Convention refugee in s. 2(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 . Nor did it err in the manner in which it considered that issue, by considering the basic rights to which the applicant was apparently entitled under the Constitution and the laws of Estonia and comparing those with the rights acknowledged for Estonian nationals. That approach is one supported by the authors to which counsel for the applicants referred, and it is a reasonable approach. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  That said, in my view the tribunal in this case erred when it found that Article 1E applied to the male applicant's claim and then proceeded to consider, not expressly as an alternative, the merits of the claim. In outlining "Issues Pertinent to the Application of the Exclusion Clause Article 1E", at page 16 of its decision the tribunal sets out the manner in which its concern about the application of Article 1E was raised with counsel and then states "Of course, if the panel were to decide that the male claimant did fall under the purview of Article 1E, the panel would then consider his claim against Estonia on the merits". As I understand the decision that is what the tribunal did do, when, if it were correct that the male applicant's claim was within the purview, i.e., the meaning, of Article 1E, that would ordinarily be the end of the matter for his claim is then excluded from consideration as a refugee claim. This is the result reached by the tribunal in  
 Thambaiyah et al. 
 , to which the tribunal here referred. Had that course been followed in this case, it is my opinion that the tribunal's determination would not have been found to be unreasonable or warranting intervention by the court on an application for judicial review. Intervention in relation to the tribunal's finding that Article 1E is applicable to the applicant's claim in this case is similarly unwarranted. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  What then of the tribunal's assessment of his claim as against Estonia on its merits? Counsel for the respondent submits that the circumstances of this case bring it within the group of cases where, on the basis of the facts, the refugee claimant has, by reason of his or her record of residence in a country other than that of his or her nationality or citizenship, the possibility of claiming protection in two countries other than one where a refugee claim is made. In such circumstances it is appropriate, and necessary by reason of the exclusion clause in Article 1E, that he or she establish a well-founded fear of persecution in respect of both the country of nationality and the country of residence, before a claim to refugee status can be considered. If that were the function of Article 1E, the tribunal here by its decision has in effect accepted that the male applicant would be likely to be persecuted for Convention reasons if he were returned to Russia, the country of his nationality, but not if he were returned to Estonia, the country where he was entitled, so it determined, to continue to reside with sufficient rights similar to those of an Estonian national that he would not face a reasonable chance of persecution there. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  In written submissions, in the Applicant's Memorandum of Argument, included in the Applicant's Application Record in support of the Application for Leave and for Judicial Review, counsel for the applicant points to some 20 alleged errors of law in the decision of the tribunal. Some of these concern the decision's assessment of the independent grounds urged in relation to the separate claim of the female applicant, some concern the tribunal's application of Article 1E, and some concern the assessment by the tribunal of the basis of the claim by the male applicant. None of those "errors" except those concerning the application of Article 1E were dealt with by counsel for the applicant at the hearing except by general reference of counsel, in reply to the respondent's argument, that the tribunal ignored the totality of evidence before it, in particular in its assessment of whether particular rights to which the applicant was found to be entitled under the written words of the Estonian Constitution were appropriate findings in light of evidence available to the tribunal concerning the practice in Estonia in acknowledging those rights for others than Estonian nationals. In my opinion, the tribunal's assessment of rights to which the male applicant would be entitled were he to return and register in Estonia as a foreign national, cannot be said to be in error, even if I were not to agree with that assessment in every respect. In my view, in light of the special role and the expertise of the CRDD the court should defer to the tribunal's assessment on issues of this sort which fall within its particular specialized capacities, unless the tribunal's finding is found to be patently unreasonable. I am not persuaded that is the case here. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  For the reasons set out, I am not persuaded that in its ultimate conclusion the tribunal erred in any manner that would warrant intervention by this court. Thus, an order goes dismissing the application by the applicants for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  At the conclusion of argument, the court did not ask whether counsel desired to submit any question for consideration for certification pursuant to s. 83(1) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 , and counsel did not propose any question as a serious question of general importance within the meaning of that section. No question is certified. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Angela E. McKay/dlr 
 
 
 
 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 1.	James C. Hatheway,  
 The Law of Refugee Status 
  (Butterworths; Toronto; 1991) pp. 189-191; Atle Grahl-Madsen,  
 The Status of Refugees in International Law 
 , (Sijthoff; Leyden; 1966) Vol. I, pp. 262-270. 
 
 
 
 2.	 
 Thambaiyah et al. 
 , unreported, I.R.B. (Refugee Div.) No. M90-01972, August 22, 1990, appeal dismissed, court file A-955-90, September 3, 1992 (F.C.A.). 
 
 
 
 3.	Id, note 2. 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



