 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thatcher v. Can. (A.G.) (1996), 120 F.T.R. 116 (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Wilbert Colin Thatcher (applicant) v. The Attorney General of Canada, The Honourable Allan Rock, Minister of Justice, and the Attorney General of Saskatchewan (respondents) 
 
 (T-52-96) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Thatcher v. Canada (Attorney General) et al. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court of Canada 
 
 Trial Division 
 
 Rothstein, J. 
 
 October 3, 1996. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 In 1984 Thatcher was convicted for the first degree murder of his wife. He unsuccessfully appealed the conviction to the Supreme Court of Canada. Thatcher then applied to the Minister of Justice for the "mercy of the Crown" under the Criminal Code, s. 690. 
 
 
 
 The Minister dismissed the application. Thatcher sought judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Criminal Law - Topic 5071 
 
 Appeals - Indictable offences - Duties and powers of Minister of Justice - General - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that s. 690 of the Criminal Code "codifies and delegates to the Minister of Justice the discretion of the sovereign in respect to one aspect of the royal prerogative of mercy ... Except insofar as the Charter requires, proceedings under s. 690 are not the subject of legal rights. An application for mercy is made after a convicted person has exhausted his legal rights. Therefore, although the Minister is under a duty of fairness under the Charter, the duty must be considered with regard to the fact that there is no continuing lis between the Crown and the applicant" - See paragraphs 8 and 9. 
 
 
 
 Criminal Law - Topic 5071 
 
 Appeals - Indictable offences - Duties and powers of Minister of Justice - General - Section 690 of the Criminal Code "codifies and delegates to the Minister of Justice the discretion of the sovereign in respect to one aspect of the royal prerogative of mercy" - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, reviewed the content of the Minister's duty under s. 690 - Particularly, the court stated that in exercising his discretion under s. 690, the Minister must act in good faith and conduct a meaningful review, provided that the application was not frivolous and vexatious - "The convicted person should have a reasonable opportunity to state his case. However, proceedings under s. 690 do not constitute an appeal on the merits. There is no general right of disclosure to everything considered by the Minister or his officials" - See paragraphs 13 to 15. 
 
 
 
 Criminal Law - Topic 5073 
 
 Appeals - Indictable offences - Duties and powers of Minister of Justice - Disclosure - [See second  
 Criminal Law - Topic 5071 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Criminal Law - Topic 5073 
 
 Appeals - Indictable offences - Duties and powers of Minister of Justice - Disclosure - In 1984 Thatcher was convicted for the first degree murder of his wife - He unsuccessfully appealed the conviction to the Supreme Court of Canada - Thatcher then applied to the Minister of Justice for the "mercy of the Crown" under the Criminal Code, s. 690 - The Minister dismissed the application - Thatcher sought judicial review - He argued that he did not have full disclosure of the information in police and prosecution files, and that the Minister based his decision on some documents not provided to him - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, reviewed the disclosure requirements of the Minister under s. 690, and dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, sect. 690 [para. 1]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Hugh Harradence, for the applicant; 
 
 Mark Kindrachuk, for the Attorney General of Canada and Allan Rock, Minister of Justice; 
 
 Graeme Mitchell, for the respondents, Attorney General of Saskatchewan. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Harradence, Longworth, Logue & Harradence, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, for the applicant; 
 
 Mark Kindrachuk, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, for the Attorney General of Canada and Allan Rock, Minister of Justice; 
 
 Graham Mitchell, Regina, Saskatchewan, for the Attorney General of Saskatchewan; 
 
 George Thomson, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on August 14, 1996, at Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, before Rothstein, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on October 3, 1996. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 Issue 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Rothstein, J. 
 : The issue in this judicial review is the content of the Minister's duty of fairness to the applicant in a proceeding under s. 690 of the  
 Criminal Code 
 . Specifically, it is the extent to which the Minister is obliged to grant the applicant disclosure of documents. Section 690 provides: 
 
 
 
 "690. The Minister of Justice may, upon an application for the mercy of the Crown by or on behalf of a person who has been convicted in proceedings by indictment or who has been sentenced to preventive detention under part XXIV, 
 
 
 
 (a) direct, by order in writing, a new trial or, in the case of a person under sentence of preventive detention, a new hearing, before any court that he thinks proper, if after inquiry he is satisfied that in the circumstances a new trial or hearing, as the case may be, should be directed; 
 
 
 
 (b) refer the matter at any time to the court of appeal for hearing and determination by that court as if it were an appeal by the convicted person or the person under sentence of preventive detention, as the case may be; or 
 
 
 
 (c) refer to the court of appeal at any time, for its opinion, any question on which he desires the assistance of that court, and the court shall furnish its opinion accordingly." 
 
 
 
 Facts 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  On November 5, 1984, in the Court of Queen's Bench of Saskatchewan, the applicant was convicted of the first degree murder of his wife. An appeal to the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan was dismissed on January 17, 1986 [see 46 Sask.R. 241], and an appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada was dismissed on May 14, 1987 [see 75 N.R. 198; 57 Sask.R. 113]. On October 11, 1989, the applicant applied to the Minister of Justice for the "mercy of the Crown" under s. 690 of the  
 Criminal Code 
 . 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The applicant made a number of submissions to the Minister. Counsel for the Department of Justice conducted an investigation, including reviewing transcripts and other documents, and interviewing witnesses. A draft "investigative summary" was prepared which summarized the trial evidence, the appellate proceedings, the material provided by the applicant, and other information gathered during the investigation. The draft investigative summary was provided to applicant's counsel for comment. Applicant's counsel then wrote two letters to the Department of Justice, and two further submissions were filed on behalf of the applicant. The investigative summary was corrected for typographical errors, and a final version was prepared. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The material provided to the Minister of Justice for his consideration in relation to the s. 690 application consisted of the investigative summary, the submissions and letters from the applicant, and legal opinions and advice provided by counsel from the Department of Justice. On April 14, 1994, the Minister rendered his decision dismissing the applicant's application. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The applicant now seeks judicial review of the Minister's decision on the ground that he was denied fairness. The applicant submits that he did not have full disclosure of the information in police and prosecution files, and that the Minister based his decision on some documents not provided to the applicant. He asks for disclosure of everything seen by both the Minister and his officials. The evidence filed by the respondents is that, with the exception of legal opinions and advice, there are no documents which were considered by the Minister which were not provided to the applicant. 
 
 
 
 Juristiction Of The Court To 
 
 Review Decisions Of The Minister 
 
 Under Section 690 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Since the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, cabinet decisions made under the authority of the royal prerogative are subject to judicial review for compatibility with the  
 Charter 
 . At page FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED (as he then was), stated: 
 
 
 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED [See footnote 1]. 
 
 
 
 In  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED explicitly found that decisions made by the Minister under s. 690 (then s. 617) of the  
 Criminal Code 
  are subject to judicial review. There is, therefore, no dispute that this court has jurisdiction to review the decision of the Minister of Justice. 
 
 
 
 The Extent Of The Minister's Duty 
 
 Of Fairness Under Section 690 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  As already mentioned, the question in controversy is the extent of the Minister's duty of fairness under s. 690. The content of that duty varies depending on the nature of the proceedings, the consequences of the decision for the individual affected, and the applicable statutory provisions. (See  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED upheld on appeal in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED) 
 
 
 
 Nature of Proceedings and Applicable Statutory Provisions 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Section 690 of the  
 Criminal Code 
  codifies and delegates to the Minister of Justice the discretion of the sovereign in respect to one aspect of the royal prerogative of mercy (see  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). The nature of this type of proceeding is outlined by   
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  While the observations of Lord Diplock must now be read in Canada in light of the  
 Charter 
 , they do provide some guidance as to the nature of the proceedings. Except insofar as the  
 Charter 
  requires, proceedings under s. 690 are not the subject of legal rights. An application for mercy is made after a convicted person has exhausted his legal rights. Therefore, although the Minister is under a duty of fairness under the  
 Charter 
 , the duty must be considered with regard to the fact that there is no continuing lis between the Crown and the applicant. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  That the function of the Minister of Justice under s. 690 is an "exemplar of a purely discretionary act" is reflected in the wide allowance given to the Minister to exercise his discretion. There are no statutory provisions directing the Minister as to the manner in which he should exercise his discretion. There are no requirements as to the type of investigation the Minister must carry out under s. 690. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Further, no rules of procedure have been laid down. There does not appear to be a limitation on the number of applications that can be made under s. 690 by a convicted person or when such applications must be made. Moreover, there is no appeal from the decision of the Minister under this section. 
 
 
 
 Consequences of the Decision upon the Applicant 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  An adverse decision by the Minister in exercising his discretion under s. 690 can result in the continuation of a lengthy, if not lifetime, incarceration of a convicted person. This deprivation of liberty is what engages the applicant's rights under s. 7 of the  
 Charter 
 , and requires that the Minister act fairly in exercising his discretion. However, it is important to remember, even in the context of the  
 Charter 
 , that the applicant is asking for mercy. In this respect, there is no lis between the applicant and the Minister, and the applicant has already had the full benefit of the  
 Charter 
  in the antecedent judicial proceedings leading to the conviction.  
 
 
 
 Content of the Minister's Duty 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  Having regard to the nature of proceedings under s. 690 and the consequences to the individual, I am of view that the content of the Minister's duty of fairness under s. 690 is less than that applicable to judicial proceedings. In exercising his discretion under s. 690, the Minister must act in good faith and conduct a meaningful review, provided that the application is not frivolous or vexatious. The convicted person should have a reasonable opportunity to state his case. However, proceedings under s. 690 do not constitute an appeal on the merits. There is no general right of disclosure to everything considered by the Minister or his officials.  
 
 
 
 [14] 
  Serious applications will usually arise from some new matter indicating it is likely that there has been a miscarriage of justice. To the extent that the Minister's investigation discovers new relevant information, the convicted person should have adequate disclosure of that new information. The manner in which the Minister discloses the new relevant information — be it actual documents or only the gist of the information obtained by the Minister — will depend on the circumstances of each case, having regard to the right of a convicted person to have a reasonable opportunity to state his case.  
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Exceptionally, as a result of new information that is substantial and would provide a reasonable basis for a finding of miscarriage of justice, the Minister may find it necessary to consider material in police or prosecution files. In such a case, the material, or at least the gist of the material the Minister or his officials review, if not already known by the applicant, would have to be disclosed to him. But there is no general obligation on the Minister to review police and prosecution files or to disclose those files merely because of a request by a convicted person. 
 
 
 
 Application To The Facts Of This Case 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  In this case, the applicant raises three areas with respect to which he seeks disclosure. I will consider them in turn.  
 
 
 
 [17] 
  1. The first relates to a record of a telephone conversation between the Thatcher residence in Moose Jaw and the Sheraton Oasis Hotel in Palm Springs, California at 6:24 p.m. on January 21, 1983, the night of the murder. The applicant alleges that he spoke to one Lynne Dally (Mendell) in that call. The murder took place that night at about 6:00 p.m. in Regina. The applicant says the call proves that he could not have been in Regina at 6:00 p.m. when the murder was committed. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The applicant does not explain how the telephone record of the call would place him in any better position than the information already in his possession to advance this point. The transcript of the cross-examination of Lynne Dally (Mendell) at trial records that counsel for the applicant put questions to Ms. Dally which indicated that counsel knew of the call between the applicant's residence and the Sheraton Oasis Hotel. Further, there is no indication that it was not open to the applicant to subpoena the relevant telephone company record if he thought it would be useful to him. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  The information sought here is not new information obtained by the Minister in the course of his investigation. Indeed, it is information which was available to the applicant and was known to his counsel at trial. I am satisfied that the applicant has had a reasonable opportunity to present his case on this point. There is no breach of fairness by the Minister with respect to this information. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  2. The applicant refers to a statement to the police that may have been made by one Gary Anderson on January 24 or January 26, 1983, a few days after the murder. The Anderson statement raises more squarely than the telephone record the matter of disclosure of the police and prosecution files to which the applicant has not had access. This is the real substance of his claim.  
 
 
 
 [21] 
  In essence, it is the applicant's position that he should be entitled to disclosure according to the standard set forth by the Supreme Court of Canada in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, wherein it was determined that in a prosecution for an indictable offence, the duty on the Crown is to disclose all relevant information to the defence. However, here, the principles of  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  must be considered in light of the fact that the applicant has already exhausted his legal rights in the judicial system. The applicant was properly tried and convicted under the laws in force at the relevant time -- a time at which the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  standard of disclosure did not yet apply. (The applicant's appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada was dismissed on May 17, 1987, whereas,  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  was decided in 1991.) 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  Once a convicted person is no longer in the judicial system he cannot seek to re-open his case on the basis of a subsequently decided case that changes the law from what it had been at the time of his conviction. In regard to re-opening a case, the Supreme Court held in  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, that: 
 
 
 
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
 
 
 
 [23] 
  As already mentioned, the process before the Minister under s. 690 is not a continuation of the lis between the Crown and the applicant, and is entirely independent of the applicant's trial and appeals. The applicant was, therefore, no longer in the judicial system at the time when the  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  standard of disclosure took effect. Section 690 cannot be used by a convicted person as a means of getting around  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  [See footnote 2]. 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  As to whether this case is an exceptional one requiring the Minister to specifically consider material in police or prosecution files, there was "new information" that the Minister considered. The Minister had before him "new information" allegedly contradicting the testimony of Anderson, who was argued to have been a key witness at the applicant's trial.  
 
 
 
 [25] 
  With respect to this "new information", the Minister's reasons indicate that he thoroughly considered submissions concerning information gathered from Calvin Smoker, Karen Naugler, Terry Chubb and Dan Doyle. The Minister found that the statements of Calvin Smoker, although recent, were unreliable and inconsistent with facts established by reliable evidence. He found the statements of Karen Naugler to be unreliable hearsay, contradicted by the originator of the information. The statements of Terry Chubb, he found to be mistaken and not capable of belief. He found that the statements of Dan Doyle did not constitute "new information". Counsel for the applicant knew about the Doyle statements before trial and had obtained disclosure according to the standard of disclosure at that time. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  The Minister concluded that none of the information constituted a new matter that would provide a reasonable basis for a finding of miscarriage of justice. Given this conclusion, any decision by the Minister not to probe further and consider information in police and prosecution files, i.e. the Anderson statements, comes within the broad discretion that he possesses under s. 690 with respect to his "inquiry". In these circumstances, it is not bad faith or a dereliction of duty by the Minister not to grant disclosure of the Anderson statement, if indeed it exists in police or prosecution files. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  3. Advice and opinions from counsel for the Department of Justice to the Minister were not provided to the applicant. While the applicant does not seek legal opinions provided to the Minister (and it appears he could not by virtue of  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED he does express the concern that the opinions and advice provided to the Minister may have contained other factual information to which he says he is entitled. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  In legal proceedings, where a dispute arises as to whether documents claimed to be privileged are indeed subject to privilege, there is a recognized process by which the Court may inspect the documents and rule on the privilege claim. However, given that the Minister's actions under s. 690 of the  
 Criminal Code 
  are discretionary and the proceedings in this case are not a continuation of the applicant's criminal trial, I do not think the procedure that applies in legal proceedings applies here. Accordingly, there is no right in the applicant to ask the court to inspect the advice or opinions received by the Minister in a manner analogous to the court inspecting documents claimed to be privileged in judicial proceedings or to order disclosure of such advice or opinions. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  In this case, the evidence before me indicates that the Minister has amply met his duty of fairness to the applicant. From his detailed 73-page decision, it is obvious that the Minister conducted a meaningful review. There is no indication that the Minister's decision was based on information that was not available to the applicant. The disclosure given to the applicant and the number and extent of the submissions made by the applicant demonstrate that the applicant has had a reasonable opportunity to present his case. The application for judicial review is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/vem 
 
 
 
 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 1.	Section 7 of the  
 Charter 
  states: 
 
 
 
 "7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice." 
 
 
 
 2.	It is perhaps worth observing that this issue will likely not arise in respect of convictions after  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  because of the duty now on the Crown to disclose all relevant information in the criminal proceedings. Further, under  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  the Crown is under a continuing obligation to disclose  
 new 
  information that comes into its possession. (See  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED.) The distinction in this case is that the applicant seeks to use  
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED 
  to obtain  
 old 
  information in a plea for mercy under section 690. 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




