 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Sandorne Lakatos and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 785)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
de Montigny, J.
August 8, 2014.
Counsel:
Daniel M. Fine, for the applicants;
Manuel Mendelzon, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Daniel M. Fine, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
de Montigny, J.
: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (
IRPA
), of a decision rendered by Ken Atkinson of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the RPD or the Board), refusing the refugee protection claims made by Sandorne Lakatos (the principal Applicant) and her minor son, Richard Kevin Lakatos. The decision was rendered on February 6, 2013.
[2]
For the reasons set out below, I have come to the conclusion that this application for judicial review ought to be dismissed.
I.
Facts
[3]
The principal Applicant is a citizen of Hungary born in 1958. She is of Roma ethnicity. Her son, also of Roma ethnicity, was born in 1998. The principal Applicant is also the mother of three other children, who are now adults and are not part of the present claim.
[4]
The principal Applicant alleges she had been living in the town of Miskolc all her life when, in April 2011, local government agents told her she would have to relocate to Kiss Tokaj on June 10, 2011. She claims that Kiss Tokaj was designated as a town where Roma were being moved to reduce the Romani population of Miskolc. The Romani community complained, but nothing was done. According to the principal Applicant, a nearby Romani family who had received a notice of removal and had not left their residence were handcuffed and forced to move.
[5]
The principal Applicant asserts that on June 10, 2011, the day after she came to Canada, her son Norbert, who was still in Hungary (he came to Canada in October 2011), indicated that the furniture had been taken by the authorities and that another notice of removal was posted on the door.
[6]
The principal Applicant also refers to other alleged incidents of persecution because of both her and her family's Roma ethnicity. She claims that in 2009 her minor son was hit by a teacher at school, as a result of which he had to receive medical attention, and that he was persistently bullied because of his ethnicity. Each time, the principal Applicant approached the school authorities, but nothing happened. She alleges she was even told by the school principal that wherever she went, no one would believe her because of her ethnicity.
[7]
The principal Applicant also states that in the summer of 2010, her husband went to the Roma self-government because he had been experiencing problems with Hungarian Guardsmen and skinheads, but he was told nothing could be done. In September 2010, it is alleged that armed Hungarian Guardsmen broke into their home, yelled racial slurs, broke furniture, threatened to kill the children, and attacked the principal Applicant's husband, splitting his scalp open (an injury for which he claimed to have received medical attention). The Applicant also claims that Guardsmen told them they had six months to move. In January 2011, it is alleged that the principal Applicant's husband was attacked by the same four men and he reported the attack to the police, but was told that without any individual identification of the attackers, they could not do anything.
[8]
The principal Applicant's husband left for Canada in January 2011 and apparently also made a claim for refugee protection. They have been separated since that time and they do not intend to resume living together.
[9]
As for the principal Applicant, she arrived in Canada with her minor son on June 9, 2011 and made a claim for refugee protection that same day.
II.
Decision under review
[10]
The RPD acknowledged the Applicants' identity and Roma ethnicity, but was not convinced that the principal Applicant was forced to leave her apartment because of her ethnicity. While she indicated she could not submit the notices of removal because they had been left in the apartment, the RPD concluded that her allegation that she thought she had been asked to move because of her ethnicity was not persuasive. Further, while she alleged that her brother was also removed, the RPD noted that she did not have much contact with him since coming to Canada.
[11]
Regarding proof of the medical treatments received by her husband following the attack during the summer of 2010, the principal Applicant alleges that she left the doctor's report in her apartment and that it would be impossible for her to obtain another report from the doctor. The principal Applicant also claims the doctor's report regarding her minor son's medical treatment after being hit by a teacher was left in the apartment. No attempt was made to obtain these reports, allegedly because the doctors would not send them.
[12]
According to the RPD, these allegations are contradicted by the documentary evidence, which states that doctors must notify the police when treating a victim of crime-related injuries and that victims of violence can obtain a medical report. The RPD is also of the opinion that it is difficult to determine exactly how the events occurred and what weight should be given to them without the reports.
[13]
The RPD then turned to the issue of state protection, stating that the principal Applicant had failed to rebut the presumption that a state is capable of protecting its citizens with clear and convincing evidence. It then goes on to describe the legal framework regarding state protection:
• This protection need not be perfect;
• It is important to consider whether a legislative and procedural framework for protection exists;
• A state must engage in serious efforts to protect its citizens at the operational level;
• The burden to prove an absence of state protection is directly proportional to the level of democracy of that state;
• A failure by the local authorities to provide protection does not mean that the state as a whole is incapable of protecting its citizens.
[14]
Turning to the documentary evidence regarding Hungary, the RPD notes that Hungary is a democracy. It also underlines that the government has enacted a new Fundamental Law as well as more than 20 Cardinal laws in 2011 that could undermine the country's democratic institutions and that a number of documents submitted by the principal Applicant indicate that the new legislation does not protect basic human rights. However, other documentary evidence highlights that Hungary is indeed a democracy.
[15]
While it was submitted that the state protection for Roma was ineffective, the RPD indicates that documentary evidence shows that the country is attempting to correct this discrimination, citing among others, the report of the
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
adopted in June 2008. In fact, efforts have been made to limit and ban activities of right-wing xenophobic political organizations and to curtail abuse by the police by increasing the recruitment of Roma police officers and by setting up the Independent Police Complaint Committee. The RPD also mentions that the Hungarian criminal code includes provisions against incitement to hate-inspired violence and that these types of crimes are seriously punished. In 2011, operations were also conducted to eliminate corruption within law enforcing agencies and an anti-discrimination legal service network that offers legal aid to Roma has been put into place. However, legal clinics have been found to be inaccessible for many Roma and the network's lawyers rejected some Roma cases.
[16]
The principal Applicant indicated that they had not reported the attack of 2010 because the attackers had told them they would find out if they did. The principal Applicant however alleged that her husband reported the 2011 incident, but had not obtained a copy of the police report since she thought no report was made. The RPD rejected this hearsay evidence and concluded there was no persuasive evidence that the principal Applicant or her family had approached the police at all. For all of the above, the RPD concluded that she had not rebutted the presumption of state protection.
[17]
While the RPD mentions that education is generally less accessible for Roma children and that school facilities for Roma were in considerably worse condition than those having non-Roma majorities, it concluded that there was no persuasive evidence that the principal Applicant was denied education because of her Roma ethnicity.
[18]
The RPD also reviewed documentary evidence on the employment opportunities for Roma and underlined that the unemployment rate for Roma was high. However, programs to alleviate unemployment were implemented in recent years. Consequently, the RPD found that there was no persuasive evidence to the fact that the principal Applicant was denied employment based on her ethnicity.
[19]
Finally, many legislations and resolutions have recently been enacted and measures have been taken to thwart racial discrimination in areas such as employment, social security, health and education. While some critics have been disputing the actual effectiveness of these measures, a decrease in crime rates and trends in the country suggests that the state protection has been effective.
[20]
The RPD concludes that while Hungary has faced difficulties in the past regarding discrimination towards Roma, the documentary evidence shows that, even if not perfect, the state protection is however, adequate and effective. Consequently, the principal Applicant has not been able to rebut the presumption of state protection and cannot be found to be a refugee or a person in need of protection. The same conclusion applies to the principal Applicant's minor son.
III.
Issues
[21]
This application raises two issues:
A. Did the RPD err in finding the principal Applicant not credible?
B. Was the RPD's state protection finding unreasonable?
IV.
Analysis
[22]
It is well established that credibility findings attract a standard of reasonableness, since the RPD had the privilege of seeing and hearing the principal Applicant's representations and reviewing the evidence she submitted. As such, these findings must be reviewed by this Court with a high degree of deference.
[23]
As for state protection, it is also trite law that the applicable standard of review is reasonableness since it is a question of mixed fact and law.
[24]
Accordingly, the Court shall not intervene if the "decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
A.
Did the RPD err in finding the principal Applicant not credible?
[25]
The principal Applicant argues that the RPD erred in impugning her credibility essentially because of a lack of corroboration and supporting evidence. Quoting from a number of decisions, counsel submitted that the absence of documentation is not sufficient, in and of itself, to make a negative credibility finding.
[26]
Applicants are no doubt presumed to be telling the truth in an RPD hearing: see, for ex.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . As such, failure to provide corroborating evidence will not normally be sufficient to impugn credibility, even if it is a factor that can be taken into consideration. That being said, it will be otherwise when the RPD does not accept an applicant's explanation for failing to produce evidence when it would reasonably be expected to be available. As my colleague Justice Zinn stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
Further, although there is a presumption that sworn evidence is true and cannot be undermined by a lack of corroborative evidence, there is an exception. The exception is triggered when a tribunal does not accept the applicant's explanation for failing to produce evidence when it would reasonably be expected to be available ...
See also:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[27]
This is precisely the situation here. First, the Board could reasonably expect the Applicants to have the notice to vacate their apartment to support their allegations that they had been forced to move out due to their ethnicity. After all, the principal Applicant's son was at the apartment after the principal Applicant left for Canada and she still has family in Hungary. In the absence of any documentation, her allegation that she was moved because they are Roma is pure speculation and the Board was entitled to find that there is no persuasive evidence to support her claim.
[28]
The same is true of the Board's finding with respect to the lack of medical documentation. The principal Applicant testified that the doctor's reports in relation to both her husband's and son's injuries were left in the apartment. She further testified that she did not know she would need such a document and made no efforts to obtain a copy, because the doctor would not have sent it. Furthermore, she felt the doctor would not have notified the police about her husband's injuries. Yet, as the Board noted, the available objective documentary evidence clearly states that doctors must notify police when they treat someone with crime-related injuries by filling out a report and submitting it to them. Moreover, the Board further noted that the documentary evidence indicated medical records are kept by hospitals and clinics for approximately 30 to 50 years, and that patients can make a request in writing or authorize someone else to obtain a copy for them. In those circumstances, the Board could reasonably reject the explanations given by the principal Applicant and conclude that it was difficult to determine exactly how these events occurred and whether any injuries were suffered. The Applicants failed to both provide acceptable documents or a reasonable explanation for their absence.
B.
Was the RPD's state protection finding unreasonable?
[29]
The Applicants submit that the RPD applied the wrong test since it failed to analyze the factual effectiveness and the success of the efforts made by the Hungarian authorities. The principal Applicant further argues that the RPD merely relied on general evidence and boilerplate analysis, and failed to consider contradictory evidence and the principal Applicant's particular situation. According to the Applicants, the Board's findings with respect to the level of democracy existing in Hungary contradicts the documentary evidence as well as a number of cases from this Court where it was found that the Roma cannot expect state authorities to protect them. The principal Applicant also argues that the Board erred in setting aside her hearsay evidence that her husband made a police report, without providing any reasonable basis for doing so.
[30]
I agree with the Applicants that the Board's analysis with respect to state protection is not free from ambiguity and appears to focus on the "serious efforts" made by the Hungarian authorities and on the steps taken at the legislative and operational levels to protect the Roma. Yet it is now well established that good intentions and efforts are insufficient if they do not translate into a reasonable measure of protection. Summarizing the evolution of the jurisprudence on this matter, my colleague Justice Strickland stated the following in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[35] State protection need not be perfect, but it must be adequate, and "only in situations in which state protection 'might reasonably have been forthcoming' will the claimant's failure to approach the state for protection defeat his claim" (
Ward
, above, at para 49;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)).
[36] Instead, the focus of the RPD must be on what is actually happening in a country, that is, evidence of actual or operational level protection, and not on efforts that a state is endeavouring to put in place. As stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], regarding the Hungarian Roma applicants in that case:
[5] [...] It is not enough to say that steps are being taken that some day may result in adequate state protection. It is what state protection is actually provided at the present time that is relevant. In the present case, the evidence is overwhelming that Hungary is unable presently to provide adequate protection to its Roma citizens. I repeat what I wrote in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2010 FC 1176 at paragraphs 8 to 11:
8 Another error of law is with respect to what is the nature of state protection that is to be considered. Here the Member found that Mexico "is making serious and genuine efforts" to address the problem. That is not the test. What must be considered is the actual effectiveness of the protection.
[...]
See also:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[31]
To be fair, the RPD acknowledged that there is evidence contradicting its overall conclusion of adequate protection. For example, it quoted a number of documents from non-governmental organizations, as well as Responses to Information Requests, suggesting that the new Fundamental Law and Cardinal laws do not protect basic human rights (para 25), that discrimination and prejudice within the police are considered a general problem that will continue until there are structural reforms (para 27), that the legal offices of an anti-discrimination legal service network were located in the larger cities and were inaccessible to Roma living in deep poverty (para 33), that courts increasingly used the provision of the criminal code on racism to convict Roma (para 34), that Romani students are often segregated at school and/or placed in less well equipped facilities (para 37), and that unemployment is higher for Romani (para 39).
[32]
Nevertheless, the RPD concluded that, "although not perfect, there is adequate state protection in Hungary and that Hungary is making changes at the operational level to deal with the problem of racism against Roma" (para 44). This general conclusion appears to be based on efforts and measures taken instead of actual effectiveness. For example, the Board states (at para 26) that Hungary is attempting to correct its historical discrimination against the Roma people and is taking steps to limit and ban the activities of right-wing political organizations, and that there is no evidence that these initiatives are more than efforts or that they bear fruit. The Board also reports (paras 28, 30-31) that efforts to curtail abuse by the police have been made, by increasing the recruitment of Roma police officers, setting up the Independent Police Complaint Committee and providing training in human rights, but there is no evidence that these measures have helped to thwart discrimination from police forces towards Roma. The Board mentions (paras 29, 41) that the criminal code includes provisions against hate-inspired violence, that laws were enacted in 2010 broadening the range of views whose expression is illegal, and that significant legislation has been introduced to combat racial discrimination, but again there is not a word as to the effectiveness or the impact of these legislative measures. Finally, the Board describes (paras 42-43) a number of measures taken by the government to eradicate discrimination in various fields (education, health, employment, housing, etc.) but does not indicate whether these have resulted in any significant changes at the operational level.
[33]
Despite these shortcomings, I am unable to find in favour of the Applicants. It is insufficient for applicants to rely solely on documentary evidence of flaws in state protection apparatus if they have failed to avail themselves of whatever protection is available. Applicants must approach their state for protection where state protection might reasonably be forthcoming, and it is only in a situation of complete breakdown of the state apparatus that this requirement will be lifted:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the claimant was not able to rebut the presumption of state protection based on one unsuccessful attempt to seek out protection from local police officers. In the case at bar, the Board could reasonably find that the Applicants had not fully demonstrated the inadequacy of the mechanisms of state protection available to them. The principal Applicant gave evidence that they did not contact the police after the alleged attack by four Guardsmen in their apartment in the summer of 2010. As for the alleged attack against her husband, the principal Applicant could only testify that her husband told her he reported the matter to the police. This was clearly insufficient to establish that protection was not reasonably forthcoming, despite the flaws identified in the state protection in Hungary.
V.
Conclusion
[34]
For all of the above reasons, I am of the view that this application for judicial review must be dismissed. The Board could reasonably find that the Applicants are not credible and had not established that they had been persecuted because of their ethnicity. The Board could also determine, subsidiarily, that the Applicants failed to rebut the presumption of state protection, despite some flaws in its analysis of that concept.
[35]
No question has been submitted for certification purposes, and none will be certified.
JUDGMENT
[36]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application for judicial review is dismissed. No question is certified.
.........................
Sandorne  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  La Cour est saisie d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire, présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (LIPR), de la décision rendue par laquelle le commissaire Ken Atkinson de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (ci-après, la SPR ou la Commission) a rejeté les demandes d'asile de Sandorne Lakatos (la demanderesse principale) et de son fils mineur, Richard Kevin Lakatos. La décision a été rendue le 6 février 2013.
[2]
Pour les motifs exposés ci-dessous, j'arrive à la conclusion que la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée.
I.
Les faits
[3]
La demanderesse principale est une citoyenne de la Hongrie; elle est née en 1958. Elle est d'origine ethnique rom. Son fils, qui est lui aussi d'origine ethnique rom, est né en 1998. La demanderesse principale est aussi mère de trois autres enfants qui sont maintenant d'âge adulte et qui ne sont pas parties à la présente demande.
[4]
La demanderesse principale affirme qu'elle vivait depuis toujours dans la ville de Miskolc lorsque, en avril 2011, des agents de l'administration locale l'ont avisée qu'elle devait déménager à Kiss Tokaj le 10 juin 2011. Elle soutient que Kiss Tokaj avait été désignée comme ville où les Roms seraient déplacés pour réduire la population rom à Miskolc. La communauté rom s'est plainte, mais en vain. D'après la demanderesse principale, une famille rom voisine, qui avait reçu un avis d'éviction et qui n'avait pas quitté son domicile, avait été menottée et emmenée de force.
[5]
La demanderesse principale affirme que le 10 juin 2011, le lendemain de son arrivée au Canada, son fils Norbert, qui se trouvait encore en Hongrie (il est venu au Canada en octobre 2011), lui a dit que les autorités avaient enlevé les meubles de leur appartement et affiché un autre avis d'éviction sur la porte.
[6]
La demanderesse principale signale d'autres prétendus incidents de persécution découlant de l'ethnicité rom de sa famille. En 2009, soutient-elle, son fils mineur a reçu des coups d'un de ses professeurs à l'école et a dû recevoir des soins médicaux; de plus, il était constamment victime d'intimidation en raison de son ethnicité. Chaque fois, la demanderesse principale s'est adressée aux autorités scolaires, mais ces démarches n'ont rien donné. Elle allègue que le directeur de l'école lui a même dit que, où qu'elle aille en Hongrie, personne ne la croirait parce qu'elle était une Rom.
[7]
Selon la demanderesse principale, à l'été 2010, son époux s'est adressé au gouvernement autonome rom pour signaler des problèmes avec des membres de la garde hongroise et des skinheads; toutefois, les autorités lui ont répondu qu'elles ne pouvaient rien faire. Il est allégué que, en septembre 2010, des membres armés de la garde hongroise se sont introduits par effraction chez eux, ont crié des propos racistes, ont brisé des meubles, ont menacé de tuer les enfants et ont agressé l'époux de la demanderesse principale, lui fendant le cuir chevelu (une blessure pour laquelle il a affirmé avoir reçu des soins médicaux). D'après la demanderesse principale, les membres de la garde hongroise leur ont également dit qu'ils disposaient de six mois pour déménager. En janvier 2011, l'époux de la demanderesse principale aurait été de nouveau agressé par les quatre mêmes hommes et aurait signalé l'agression à la police; toutefois, les policiers lui ont dit que, faute d'une identification individuelle des agresseurs, ils ne pouvaient rien faire.
[8]
L'époux de la demanderesse principale a quitté le pays pour le Canada en janvier 2011 et aurait présenté lui aussi une demande d'asile. Ils sont séparés depuis le départ de l'époux et n'ont pas l'intention de reprendre leur vie commune.
[9]
En ce qui a trait à la demanderesse principale, elle est arrivée au Canada avec son fils mineur, le 9 juin 2011, et a présenté une demande d'asile le même jour.
II.
La décision visée par le contrôle judiciaire
[10]
La SPR a reconnu que l'identité et l'ethnicité rom des demandeurs avaient été établies, mais n'était pas convaincue que la demanderesse principale avait été contrainte de quitter son appartement en raison de son origine ethnique. Bien que cette dernière ait affirmé qu'elle ne pouvait pas produire les avis d'éviction parce qu'elle les avait laissés à l'appartement, la SPR a conclu que l'allégation selon laquelle elle croyait avoir été évincée en raison de son origine ethnique n'était pas convaincante. De plus, la SPR a noté que, même si la demanderesse principale alléguait que son frère avait lui aussi été évincé par la suite, elle lui avait peu parlé depuis qu'elle était arrivée au Canada.
[11]
En ce qui a trait à la preuve des soins médicaux reçus par son époux à la suite de l'agression survenue à l'été 2010, la demanderesse principale allègue qu'elle a laissé le rapport du médecin dans son appartement et qu'il lui serait impossible d'en obtenir une copie auprès du médecin. De plus, elle affirme avoir laissé dans l'appartement le rapport du médecin sur les soins prodigués à son fils mineur après les coups donnés par son professeur. Aucune tentative n'a été faite pour obtenir une copie de ces rapports, parce que les médecins refuseraient, semble-t-il, de les envoyer.
[12]
D'après la SPR, la preuve documentaire contredit ces allégations: les médecins sont tenus d'aviser les policiers lorsqu'ils soignent une personne pour des blessures liées à un acte criminel et les victimes de violence peuvent obtenir un rapport médical. La SPR estime que, sans ses rapports, il est difficile de déterminer exactement la façon dont les événements se sont produits et le poids qu'il convient de leur attribuer.
[13]
La SPR se penche ensuite sur la question de la protection de l'État et conclut que la demanderesse principale n'a pas réfuté, au moyen d'éléments de preuve clairs et convaincants, la présomption selon laquelle un État est en mesure de protéger ses citoyens. Elle décrit ensuite le cadre juridique qui s'applique à la question de la protection de l'État:
• il n'est pas nécessaire que la protection soit parfaite;
• il est important d'examiner s'il existe un cadre législatif et procédural de protection;
• l'État doit déployer des efforts sérieux pour assurer une protection réelle ou concrète à ses citoyens;
• le fardeau d'établir l'absence de protection de l'État est directement proportionnel au degré de démocratie atteint chez l'État en cause;
• l'omission de la part des autorités locales d'assurer la protection demandée ne signifie pas que l'État dans son ensemble est incapable de protéger ses citoyens.
[14]
Passant ensuite à la preuve documentaire sur la Hongrie, la SPR note que la Hongrie est une démocratie. Elle souligne également que le gouvernement a adopté une nouvelle loi fondamentale et plus de 20 lois cardinales en 2011 qui pourraient miner les institutions démocratiques du pays; elle souligne aussi qu'un certain nombre de documents soumis par la demanderesse principale indiquent que les nouvelles lois ne pas protègent les droits fondamentaux de la personne. Toutefois, d'autres éléments de preuve documentaire mettent en lumière que la Hongrie est bel et bien une démocratie.
[15]
Même s'il a été soutenu que la protection de l'État offerte aux Roms en Hongrie est inefficace, la SPR signale - en se reportant notamment au rapport de la
Commission européenne contre le racisme et l'intolérance
adopté en juin 2008 - que la preuve documentaire démontre que la Hongrie tente de mettre fin à cette discrimination. En fait, il y a eu des efforts en vue de limiter et d'interdire les activités des organisations politiques xénophobes d'extrême droite et de mettre fin aux abus commis par la police en intensifiant le recrutement de policiers roms et en créant le Comité indépendant d'examen des plaintes contre la police. La SPR signale aussi que le code criminel hongrois comporte des dispositions contre la violence motivée par la haine et que ces types de crimes sont passibles de peines sévères. De plus, en 2011, des opérations ont été menées en vue d'éliminer la corruption au sein des organismes d'application de la loi et un réseau de services juridiques a été mis en place pour lutter contre la discrimination, lequel offre de l'aide juridique aux Roms. Cependant, ces cliniques juridiques demeurent inaccessibles pour de nombreux Roms et des avocats du réseau ont refusé certains cas liés aux Roms.
[16]
La demanderesse principale a affirmé que son époux et elle n'avaient pas signalé l'agression survenue en 2010 parce que les agresseurs leur avaient dit qu'ils le sauraient s'ils allaient voir la police. Toutefois, elle a soutenu que son époux avait signalé l'incident de 2011, mais n'avait pas tenté d'obtenir une copie du rapport de police étant donné qu'elle ne croyait pas que les policiers en aient rédigé un. La SPR a rejeté cette preuve par ouï-dire et a conclu qu'aucune preuve convaincante ne démontrait que la demanderesse principale ou sa famille a vraiment communiqué avec la police. Pour tous les motifs exposés ci-dessus, la SPR a conclu que la demanderesse principale n'avait pas réfuté la présomption de la protection de l'État.
[17]
Bien que la SPR ait mentionné que l'accès à l'éducation est en général plus restreint pour les enfants roms et que les installations scolaires destinées aux Roms sont dans un état nettement inférieur à celui des installations majoritairement fréquentées par des élèves non roms, elle a conclu qu'aucune preuve convaincante ne démontrait que la demanderesse principale s'est vu refuser l'accès à l'éducation en raison de son origine ethnique rom.
[18]
La SPR a aussi examiné la preuve documentaire sur les possibilités d'emploi pour les Roms et a souligné que le taux de chômage chez les Roms est élevé. Toutefois, des programmes visant à atténuer le chômage ont été mis en œuvre au cours des dernières années. Par conséquent, la SPR a conclu qu'il n'existait aucune preuve convaincante tendant à démontrer que la demanderesse principale n'a pu travailler en raison de son origine ethnique.
[19]
Enfin, de nombreuses lois et résolutions ont été adoptées récemment et de nombreuses mesures ont été prises en vue de lutter contre la discrimination raciale dans des domaines tels que l'emploi, la sécurité sociale, la santé et l'éducation. Bien que certains critiques mettent en doute l'efficacité réelle de ces mesures, une baisse des taux de criminalité et certaines tendances relevées au pays donnent à penser que la protection de l'État est efficace.
[20]
La SPR conclut que même si la Hongrie a eu de la difficulté dans le passé à lutter contre la discrimination à l'endroit des Roms, la preuve documentaire indique que, bien qu'elle ne soit pas parfaite, la protection de l'État offerte en Hongrie est adéquate et efficace. Par conséquent, la demanderesse principale n'a pas réfuté la présomption de la protection de l'État et ne saurait être considérée comme une réfugiée ou une personne à protéger. La même conclusion s'applique au fils mineur de la demanderesse principale.
III.
Les questions à trancher
[21]
Il y a deux questions à trancher dans le cadre de la présente demande:
A. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la demanderesse principale n'était pas crédible?
B. La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État était-elle déraisonnable?
IV.
Analyse
[22]
Il est bien établi que la norme de la décision raisonnable s'applique aux conclusions concernant la crédibilité, car la SPR a eu l'occasion de voir et d'entendre le témoignage de la demanderesse principale et d'examiner la preuve qu'elle a présentée. Ainsi, la Cour doit faire preuve d'une grande retenue en examinant ces conclusions.
[23]
Pour ce qui est de la protection de l'État, il est également bien établi que la norme de contrôle applicable est celle de la décision raisonnable étant donné qu'il s'agit d'une question mixte de fait et de droit.
[24]
Par conséquent, la Cour n'interviendra pas si la décision appartient « aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
A.
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la demanderesse principale n'était pas crédible?
[25]
La demanderesse principale soutient que la SPR a commis une erreur en mettant en doute sa crédibilité essentiellement en raison d'un manque de corroboration et de preuves à l'appui. Citant un certain nombre de décisions, l'avocat de la demanderesse a fait valoir que l'absence de documentation ne suffit pas, à elle seule, pour tirer une conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité.
[26]
Il ne fait aucun doute que, dans une audience de la SPR, il faut présumer que les demandeurs disent la vérité: voir, par exemple,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 8. Ainsi, le fait de ne pas produire de preuve corroborante ne suffira pas normalement pour mettre en doute la crédibilité d'un demandeur, bien qu'il s'agisse d'un facteur qui peut être pris en considération. Cela étant dit, la situation sera différente si la SPR n'accepte pas les explications données par un demandeur pour ne pas avoir produit une preuve alors qu'il était raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'il le fasse. Comme l'a affirmé mon collègue le juge Zinn dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
En outre, bien qu'un témoignage fait sous serment soit présumé vrai et ne puisse pas être affaibli par l'absence d'une preuve corroborante, il y a une exception. Celle-ci s'applique lorsqu'un tribunal n'accepte pas les explications données par un demandeur pour ne pas avoir produit une preuve alors qu'il était raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'il le fasse [...]
Voir également:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[27]
Il s'agit exactement de la situation que nous constatons en l'espèce. Premièrement, il était raisonnable de la part de la Commission de s'attendre à ce que les demandeurs aient l'avis d'éviction pour corroborer leurs allégations selon lesquelles ils avaient été contraints de déménager en raison de leur origine ethnique. Après tout, le fils de la demanderesse principale se trouvait à l'appartement après le départ de cette dernière pour le Canada et la demanderesse principale a encore de la famille en Hongrie. Faute de toute documentation, l'allégation selon laquelle la demanderesse a déménagé parce que sa famille est d'origine rom n'est qu'une simple supposition et la Commission était en droit de conclure qu'il n'y avait aucune preuve convaincante à l'appui de son allégation.
[28]
Il en est de même pour ce qui est de la conclusion de la Commission concernant l'absence de documentation médicale. La demanderesse principale a déclaré que les rapports du médecin ayant trait aux blessures de son époux et de son fils ont été laissés dans l'appartement. Elle a ajouté qu'elle ne savait pas qu'elle aurait besoin de ces documents et qu'elle n'avait fait aucun effort en vue d'en obtenir une copie parce que les médecins ne les lui auraient pas envoyés. De plus, elle estimait que le médecin n'aurait pas avisé la police des blessures subies par son époux. Pourtant, comme l'a signalé la Commission, la preuve documentaire objective dont nous disposons précise clairement que les médecins sont tenus d'aviser la police lorsqu'ils soignent une personne pour des blessures liées à un acte criminel, de rédiger un rapport et de le remettre à la police. En outre, la Commission a noté que, d'après la preuve documentaire, les hôpitaux et les cliniques conservent les dossiers médicaux pour une période de 30 à 50 ans, et que les patients peuvent présenter une demande écrite ou autoriser un tiers à obtenir une copie du dossier en leur nom. Dans de telles circonstances, il était raisonnable de la part de la Commission de rejeter les explications fournies par la demanderesse principale et de conclure qu'il était difficile de déterminer exactement la façon dont les événements s'étaient produits et la manière dont les blessures avaient été subies. Les demandeurs n'ont pas fourni de documents acceptables ou d'explication raisonnable pour justifier l'absence de tels documents.
B.
La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État était-elle déraisonnable?
[29]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la SPR a appliqué le mauvais critère étant donné qu'elle a omis d'analyser l'efficacité réelle et le succès des efforts consentis par les autorités hongroises. De plus, la demanderesse principale soutient que la SPR s'est contentée de preuves générales et d'une analyse standard, et a omis de prendre en considération des éléments de preuve contraires et la situation particulière de la demanderesse principale. D'après les demandeurs, les conclusions de la Commission concernant le niveau de démocratie en Hongrie vont à l'encontre de la preuve documentaire et d'un certain nombre de décisions rendues par la Cour où cette dernière a conclu que les Roms ne peuvent compter sur la protection des autorités de l'État. La demanderesse principale fait également valoir que la Commission a commis une erreur en décidant d'écarter son témoignage par ouï-dire selon lequel son époux avait fait un signalement à la police, sans fournir de motifs raisonnables à cet égard.
[30]
Je conviens avec les demandeurs que l'analyse de la Commission se rapportant à la protection de l'État n'est pas dépourvue d'ambiguïté et semble mettre l'accent sur les « efforts sérieux » consentis par les autorités hongroises et sur les mesures prises sur les plans législatifs et opérationnels en vue de protéger les Roms. Pourtant, il est maintenant bien établi que les bonnes intentions et les efforts ne suffisent pas pour assurer un niveau de protection raisonnable. Résumant l'évolution de la jurisprudence sur cette question, ma collègue la juge Strickland a affirmé ce qui suit dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 36:
[35] La protection de l'État n'a pas à être parfaite, mais elle doit être suffisante, et l'omission du demandeur de s'adresser à l'État pour obtenir sa protection fera échouer sa revendication seulement dans le cas où la protection de l'État [traduction] « aurait pu raisonnablement être assurée » (
Ward
, précité, au paragraphe 49;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (
Da Souza
), aux paragraphes 15 et 18). Une protection de l'État adéquate nécessite davantage que de faire de « sérieux efforts » en vue de résoudre les problèmes et de protéger les citoyens ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CF)).
[36] La SPR doit plutôt porter son attention sur ce qui se passe concrètement dans un pays, c'est-à-dire, sur la preuve démontrant l'existence d'une protection réelle ou concrète, et non sur les efforts déployés par un État pour la mettre en place. Comme il a été mentionné dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), au paragraphe 5, au sujet des demandeurs hongrois d'origine ethnique rom dans cette affaire:
[5] [...] Ce n'est pas suffisant de dire que des mesures sont prises en vue d'offrir un jour une protection suffisante de l'État. C'est la protection concrète, actuellement offerte qui compte. La preuve établit de façon accablante en l'espèce que la Hongrie est actuellement incapable d'offrir une protection suffisante à ses citoyens Roms. Je reprends les propos que j'ai tenus dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 11:
8 Une autre erreur de droit a trait à la nature de la protection de l'État qui doit être prise en compte. En l'espèce, le commissaire a conclu que le Mexique « fait de sérieux efforts » pour résoudre le problème. Ce n'est pas là le critère. Ce qui doit être pris en compte est l'efficacité réelle de la protection.
[...]
Voir également:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[31]
Par souci d'équité, la SPR a reconnu qu'il y avait des éléments de preuve qui allaient à l'encontre de sa conclusion générale concernant le caractère adéquat de la protection. Par exemple, elle a cité un certain nombre de documents d'organisations non gouvernementales ainsi que des réponses à des demandes d'information qui laissent entendre: que la nouvelle loi fondamentale et les lois cardinales ne protègent pas les droits fondamentaux de la personne (paragraphe 25); que la discrimination et les préjugés au sein de la police sont considérés comme un problème général qui continuera jusqu'à ce qu'il y ait des réformes structurelles (paragraphe 27); que les cabinets juridiques du réseau de services juridiques pour la lutte contre la discrimination se trouvent dans les grandes villes et sont inaccessibles pour les Roms vivant dans une extrême pauvreté (paragraphe 33); que les tribunaux utilisent de plus en plus la disposition du code criminel portant sur le racisme pour condamner des Roms (paragraphe 34); que les élèves roms étudient souvent dans des classes ségréguées et/ou sont placés dans des écoles moins équipées (paragraphe 37); et que le taux de chômage est plus élevé chez les Roms (paragraphe 39).
[32]
Néanmoins, la SPR a conclu que « bien qu'elle ne soit pas parfaite, la protection de l'État offerte en Hongrie est adéquate et [...] ce pays fait des changements sur le plan opérationnel pour remédier au problème du racisme à l'endroit des Roms » (paragraphe 44). Cette conclusion générale semble reposer sur les efforts consentis et les mesures prises, plutôt que sur l'efficacité réelle. Par exemple, la Commission affirme (au paragraphe 26) que la Hongrie tente de mettre fin à sa discrimination historique contre les Roms et prend des mesures en vue de limiter et d'interdire les activités des organisations politiques d'extrême droite; toutefois, il n'y a aucune preuve démontrant que ces initiatives ne se limitent pas à de simples efforts ou qu'elles portent fruit. Elle signale également (aux paragraphes 28, 30 et 31) que des efforts ont été consentis en vue de mettre fin aux abus commis par la police en intensifiant le recrutement de policiers roms, en créant le Comité indépendant d'examen des plaintes contre la police et en offrant une formation sur les droits de la personne; toutefois, aucune preuve ne démontre que ces mesures ont contribué à réduire le comportement discriminatoire des policiers à l'endroit des Roms. La Commission signale (aux paragraphes 29 et 41) que le code criminel contient des dispositions contre la violence motivée par la haine, que des lois adoptées en 2010 ont élargi la gamme d'opinions dont l'expression est illégale, et que d'importantes lois ont été adoptées pour lutter contre la discrimination raciale; mais, encore une fois, il n'y a pas un seul mot sur l'efficacité ou les répercussions de ces mesures législatives. Enfin, la Commission décrit (aux paragraphes 42 et 43) un certain nombre de mesures prises par le gouvernement pour éradiquer la discrimination dans divers domaines (l'éducation, la santé, l'emploi, le logement, etc.); toutefois, elle n'indique pas si ces mesures ont entraîné des changements importants sur le terrain.
[33]
Malgré ces lacunes, je ne peux trancher en faveur des demandeurs. Il ne suffit pas pour les demandeurs d'invoquer uniquement une preuve documentaire faisant état des lacunes du système de protection de l'État s'ils n'ont pris aucune mesure pour se prévaloir de la protection dont ils disposaient. Les demandeurs doivent demander la protection de leur État dans les cas où la protection peut raisonnablement être assurée et ce n'est que dans les cas d'un effondrement complet de l'appareil étatique que cette exigence peut être écartée:
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, à la page 754. Dans l'arrêt
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la demanderesse n'a pas réussi à réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État en signalant une tentative infructueuse de demander la protection de policiers locaux. Dans le cas qui nous occupe, la Commission pouvait raisonnablement conclure que les demandeurs n'avaient pas pleinement démontré l'inadéquation des mécanismes de protection de l'État à leur disposition. La demanderesse principale a déclaré qu'elle et son époux n'avaient pas communiqué avec la police après la prétendue agression commise dans leur appartement par quatre membres de la garde hongroise à l'été 2010. En ce qui a trait à la prétendue agression contre son époux, la demanderesse principale pouvait seulement affirmer que son époux lui avait dit qu'il avait signalé l'incident à la police. Cela était nettement insuffisant pour démontrer que la protection ne pouvait pas raisonnablement être assurée, malgré les lacunes relevées dans la protection de l'État en Hongrie.
V.
Conclusion
[34]
Pour tous les motifs exposés ci-dessus, j'estime que la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée. La Commission pouvait raisonnablement conclure que les demandeurs ne sont pas crédibles et n'avaient pas démontré qu'ils avaient été persécutés en raison de leur origine ethnique. Elle pouvait également décider, subsidiairement, que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de la protection de l'État, malgré certaines lacunes dans son analyse de cette notion.
[35]
Les avocats n'ont proposé aucune question à certifier et aucune ne sera certifiée.
JUGEMENT
[36]
LA COUR STATUE que
la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]