 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 387)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
de Montigny, J.
March 27, 2015.
Counsel:
Ann Crawford, for the applicant;
Ildiko Erdei, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Ann Crawford, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
de Montigny, J.
: This is an application for leave and judicial review of a decision rendered November 13, 2013 by the Immigration and Refugee Board, Refugee Protection Division (the Board) rejecting the refugee claim of Hongxin Sun (the Applicant) for lack of credibility. The Applicant alleges that he faces persecution by the Chinese authorities due to his Christian faith and membership in an underground Protestant church.
[2]
For the reasons set out below, I find that this application ought to be granted.
I.
Facts
[3]
The Applicant is a citizen of the People's Republic of China, and lived with his wife and son in the city of Yanji, in Jilin province.
[4]
The Applicant claims that he had been suffering from stomach problems that worsened in March 2010, despite medical treatment. According to his medical records, the Applicant regularly consulted a gastroenterologist from July 2009 until March 2010, at which time he began consulting a Chinese traditional medicine specialist until April 17, 2010.
[5]
The Applicant alleges that in mid-April 2010, his friend Liang Wang introduced him to Jesus Christ. Liang Wang told him that Jesus Christ cured his allergic asthma, gave him a Bible and showed him how to pray. He claims that in the following month, Liang Wang prayed for him and his condition improved until mid-May 2010, when his stomach pain disappeared. The Applicant claims that he then joined the same underground church that Liang Wang belonged to, attending his first service on May 23, 2010. He claims that he was baptized on December 25, 2010 when he received his first Holy Communion, and attended church services every week.
[6]
The Applicant further alleges that he began to serve as a lookout for the underground church, and introduced the faith to close family and friends. He claims that he introduced his friend De Cai Liu to the faith, who joined the church in January 2011.
[7]
On June 26, 2011, the Applicant alleges that the underground church was raided by the Chinese Public Service Bureau (PSB), but that they were warned by a lookout and he was therefore able to escape and hide at a friend's house. The following day, the PSB allegedly came to his house to arrest him and questioned his family about his whereabouts. The Applicant claims that the PSB returned to his house to arrest him a total of seven more times, showing his wife a warrant for his arrest on October 11, 2011. His wife told him that three of the church members, including Liang Wang, had been arrested and detained. In his amended Personal Information Form (PIF), the Applicant added that his wife went to the PSB in November 2011 to request a copy of the arrest warrant, but that they had refused to provide a copy.
[8]
The Applicant noted in his PIF that he had hired a smuggler to help him obtain a US visa and leave the country, and that he flew first to Seattle on September 17, 2011, and then crossed the border on foot, arriving in Vancouver on September 20, 2011. He filed his refugee claim on September 22, 2011. At the hearing, the Applicant explained that the smuggler made the arrangements for his US visa using his genuine passport, and that he attended an interview at the US Embassy in Beijing for that purpose. When asked how he managed to leave the country while an arrest warrant was issued against him, the Applicant said that the smuggler had bribed the customs agents. When asked why he had not claimed refugee status in the US, the Applicant answered that the smuggler had told him that his claim was more likely to succeed in Canada and that refugees were treated like prisoners in the US.
II.
The impugned decision
[9]
The Board accepted that the Applicant had suffered from stomach problems, but stated that it "believes very little if anything else the claimant had to say with respect to his allegations of persecution in China".
[10]
First, the Board concluded that the Applicant had fabricated the entire story of the miraculous cure, his membership in the underground church and the subsequent raid and arrest, and that he was not a man of Christian faith. The Board noted the following inconsistencies and implausibilities in his testimony:
When asked why Liang Wang only introduced him to Jesus Christ in April 2010 when he had been aware of the Applicant's health issues for about a year, the Applicant's answer was evasive and unsatisfactory.
When asked how he knew it was God that had cured him and not medicine, the Applicant stated that he had stopped his medication at that point and his friend's prayers healed him. The Board found this answer to be unreasonably vague and evasive, and concluded that he "was not healed miraculously of any stomach ulcer".
Although the Applicant stated that he was introduced to Jesus Christ in mid-May 2010 and cured around the same time (instantaneous recovery), he also said that he was cured when he and his friends prayed every day for him (gradual recovery).
When questioned about his wife's reaction to these events, the Applicant said that his wife witnessed the miracle of his recovery and believed that God healed him, but that she did not accept religion and was an atheist.
When questioned about De Cai Liu, the Applicant said that De Cai Liu was cured of depression by God, but this important element was not mentioned in the Applicant's PIF.
When asked why he thought De Cai Liu was convinced of the miracle of God, but his wife was not, the Applicant said he believed in freedom of religion and would not force his faith on his wife. The Board found that this explanation did not answer the question and was evasive.
Although recognizing that the Applicant had some knowledge of God and the Bible, this was inconclusive with respect to practice in China since he had been attending a church in Canada since his arrival. The Board found there was no persuasive evidence that the Applicant was able to talk about the precepts of Christianity.
[11]
The Board went on to note that the Applicant had provided no independent evidence to corroborate his testimony. Concerning the copy of the arrest warrant, the Board found that it was possible, but unlikely given the country condition documentation, that the PSB would refuse to give his wife a copy of the arrest warrant. The Board also noted that the Applicant had initially said that there was no arrest warrant issued against him. Although the Applicant said that he misunderstood the question, thinking that the Board was asking whether the police had an arrest warrant the first time they came to his house, the Board found that the question was clear and that this explanation was insufficient.
[12]
With respect to his attendance and baptism at a Christian church in Canada, the Board noted that the Applicant had presented evidence of his attendance but that attendance did not demonstrate that the Applicant was truly a person of Christian faith. The Board also found that it was entitled to import a negative credibility finding into a claimant's refugee "
sur place
" claim, and that his attendance at a Canadian church was likely intended to bolster his claim.
[13]
Concerning the smuggling story, the Board found it unlikely that the Applicant would be able to travel within China and to leave the country on his own passport without a hitch while an arrest warrant was allegedly issued against him. The Board noted that the country condition documentation demonstrates that a national policing database exists. Although recognizing that bribery is prevalent in China, the Board did not accept the explanation that the smuggler had bribed a customs agent, noting that if the PSB had been so intent on arresting him, then he would have been arrested regardless of a single bribe.
[14]
In addition, the Board found that the Applicant's explanation for why he did not claim in the US unsatisfactory, noting that the Applicant was aware of the American refugee process and would not have missed the opportunity to claim asylum if he truly had a subjective fear of persecution.
[15]
The Board also considered the country condition documentation on persecution of Christians in China, and found that incidents were rare and exceptional in Jilin province, and that there was no evidence of prosecutions for proselytizing in Jilin province. The Board found it therefore possible, but unlikely, that an underground church raid would take place in Jilin.
III.
Issue
[16]
This matter raises only one issue: Is the Board's credibility finding reasonable?
IV.
Analysis
[17]
The standard of review with respect to credibility findings of the Board is undoubtedly reasonableness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> NR 315 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[18]
I agree with counsel for the Applicant that the credibility findings of the Board are tenuous and lack transparency and intelligibility. In fact, the Board had serious doubts as to whether the Applicant was miraculously cured as a result of his belief in Jesus Christ, and this skepticism pervades the whole decision. To be sure, the Board did note, at paragraph 16 of its reasons, that "it may not be significant whether or not it was the medicine or the prayers that contributed to the claimant's alleged cure but that he 'believes' [panel's emphasis] he was cured by prayers". The problem is that the gist of the Board's reasons is at odds with these cautionary words.
[19]
First of all, the Board seems to be thinking that the Applicant suggested he was instantaneously healed in May 2010. Yet a careful reading of the record shows that the Applicant never said he was introduced to Christ in May 2010. He has consistently declared that he was
introduced
to Christ in April 2010, that he and his friend prayed regularly thereafter and that he
accepted
Christ when he recovered from his illness in mid-May 2010. He has always described the process as a gradual one, and so it seems to me that the Board's finding on this point is unfounded on the evidence.
[20]
The Board's skepticism of the Applicant's faith transpires in the following paragraph:
[15] For example, the claimant said that he was introduced to Christ in the middle of May 2010 and "in the middle of May 2010, I was no longer suffering from stomach pain anymore". That has a ring of instantaneous healing. But according to the evidence before the panel it was not instantaneous healing for he said "I took no more medication, every day I pray, my friends prayed and there was no more stomach pain". So, this was gradual and not instantaneous because it was accomplished through a daily regiment of prayers. There is no evidence before this panel how many prayers were prayed or how long a period they prayed, or that he had stopped taking his medication before the middle of May 2010. In fact, his testimony is that "At the time when my friend came and told me about God I stopped my medication ..." In other words, he stopped taking his medicine in the middle of May and he got healing in the middle of May. If indeed the claimant was cured of his medical problems, he had no way of knowing that it was because of prayers and not the medicine that he had been taking, according to the evidence, right up to the middle of May which is when he said that he got healed. It is reasonable to believe that some medicine takes a longer period of time than others to work, as well, some may not work. So, the medicine could have just worked for him around the same time he stopped taking it and started prayer.
[21]
I agree with counsel for the Applicant that it was irrelevant whether the "miracle" of the Applicant's cure actually occurred. The Board may not have shared the Applicant's belief that God was at the source of his medical recovery, but this does not mean that the Applicant does not sincerely believe it himself and is not a practicing Christian that may be subject to persecution. The Applicant explained that he stopped taking his medication in April 2010 and prayed, and that this was why he believed that God caused his recovery in May 2010. With respect, I fail to see how this explanation is vague or evasive. It clearly addressed the Board's question, and it is not incoherent. It may not have been enough to convince the Board member to convert to Christianity himself, but that is not the point. A refugee claimant is evidently not required to prove divine intervention to demonstrate his fear of religious persecution, and it is not the Board's role to make findings of fact on miracles.
[22]
Similarly irrelevant are the religious beliefs of the Applicant's wife. I agree that the Applicant's answers regarding his wife's beliefs were confusing. On the one hand, he maintained that his wife believed that God cured him, but that she was not interested in religion and that she was an atheist. When the Board asked how she could believe that God cured him and also be an atheist, he replied that she had witnessed his recovery and prayers, and that "she might assume it was God who cured me". The Board was certainly entitled to find the Applicant's explanations with respect to what his wife believed confusing and difficult to follow, and even contradictory. Yet the Applicant's wife's beliefs are irrelevant to the Applicant's claim, and have no bearing on the Applicant's own beliefs or the veracity of his allegations concerning the church raid. Inconsistencies in the evidence must be sufficiently serious and must concern matters sufficiently relevant to the issues being adjudicated to warrant an adverse credibility finding:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[23]
The same goes for the Board's analysis of the Applicant's testimony regarding his friend De Cai Liu's conversion. The Board faulted the Applicant because he only mentioned in his oral testimony, in answer to a question from the Board, that De Cai Liu suffered from depression. I fail to see why the Board found problematic the fact that he had not mentioned that detail in the narrative of his PIF; this was not a key fact related to the Applicant's belief and the police raid. Furthermore, this omission was never put to the Applicant at the hearing. Moreover, it was totally inappropriate to query why the Applicant was able to convince De Cai Liu to accept Jesus Christ, but was not able to convince his wife, as these are personal matters that are beyond the Applicant's control and have no bearing upon his own beliefs. Finally, I find the following comments totally unfitting and out of place:
The claimant testified that De Cai Liu was suffering from depression and had been to the doctors but they were unable to cure him as well (the doctors somehow couldn't help Liang Wang of his asthma, couldn't help De Cai Liu of his depression and couldn't help the claimant of his ulcer). It would seem like very stubborn strains of different illnesses that seem to attack these individuals within the space of a few months. These illnesses required divine intervention as the doctors don't seem to be able to help.
[24]
Overall, the Board's reasons regarding the Applicant's testimony are replete with sarcasm and unduly focus on insignificant and irrelevant inconsistencies. The Board even went as far as drawing an adverse credibility inference from the fact that the Applicant said "first" twice when beginning his answers. Although I am prepared to accept that the Applicant sometimes gave confused responses to questions put to him by the Board, I am concerned that the Board's analysis was coloured by its skepticism with respect to the Applicant's allegation that he was miraculously cured. Instead of assessing the sincerity of the Applicant's belief and the veracity of his story concerning the church raid, the Board gave undue weight to minor details, found inconsistencies in perceived discrepancies that were reasonably explained by the Applicant, and questioned his faith on the basis of other people's behaviour for which he could not be held responsible. On that basis, I am prepared to find that the Board's assessment of the Applicant's credibility was flawed and lacked transparency and intelligibility.
[25]
The Board also found, based on the country condition documentation, that it was more likely than not, that Chinese authorities would have provided a copy of a summons or arrest warrant on request, and that the failure to provide a copy of the arrest warrant suggested that it simply did not exist. It is true that the Response to Information Request on arrest warrants and summonses quoted by the Board indicates that the PSB normally delivers a summons to the person, that the Procuratorate will issue an arrest warrant after the PSB has investigated the case and has evidence that the suspect committed the crime, and that it is possible to obtain a copy of these documents by request to the PSB. Yet the same Response to Information Request also notes that there are discrepancies in the implementation of the law across the country. The Board was certainly entitled to disbelieve the Applicant's allegation that his wife had asked for a copy of the arrest warrant but had been turned down, but it could not use the Response to Information Request as a basis for that conclusion without discussing the
caveat
with respect to the disparities in the enforcement of the law throughout the country. As for the contradiction found by the Board between what the Applicant wrote in his PIF (that his wife was shown a warrant but could not obtain a copy) and his testimony (where he apparently said that no warrant was issued), a careful reading of the transcript shows that the question was far from clear and that the Applicant genuinely misunderstood the question.
[26]
The Board's finding that it was implausible the Applicant would be able to leave China undetected on his own genuine passport while an arrest warrant was issued against him, especially after the PSB had allegedly visited his house eight times looking for him, is equally questionable. The Board based its finding mainly on a Response to Information Request reporting the existence and expansion of a national Chinese policing database used by the PSB and at ports of entry and exit of the country. The same document also mentions that challenges remain with respect to information sharing between regional police units, and the Board itself recognizes that there is wide administrative discretion across the county and that bribery is prevalent in China. It is well established that implausibility findings may only be made in the "clearest of cases" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), where "the facts as presented are either so far outside the realm of what could reasonably be expected that the trier of fact can reasonably find that it could not possibly have happened" (Lorne Waldman,
Immigration Law and Practice
(Markham, ON: Butterworths, 1992), s 8.22, cited in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In light of the fact that the Board itself recognized that bribery is prevalent and that it is possible that information would not be effectively shared, the Board was not entitled to conclude that the Applicant's story is implausible. It was equally entirely speculative to find that the Applicant could not plausibly have travelled through China to apply for a US visa without being detected; this finding does not rest on any evidence.
[27]
I have similar concerns with respect to the Board's assessment of the evidence concerning the frequency of acts of persecution towards Christians in Jilin province. The Board could reasonably conclude that incidents in Jilin were rare and on the low end of the spectrum within China, and that it was possible but unlikely that a church raid would occur there. The Board nevertheless recognizes that there are statements in the China Aid Association Report, upon which it relies, to the effect that reported incidents should not be confused with actual incidents, and that the reported events represent only the tip of the iceberg. Accordingly, the documentary evidence may not add weight to the Applicant's testimony or prove that the church raid occurred, but it could not be used to doubt the objective veracity of the Applicant's fear of persecution either.
[28]
As for the negative inference on the Applicant's credibility relating to his subjective fear drawn from the fact that he did not seek protection in the US, the Board did not err. Although refugee claimants are not obliged to seek asylum in the first country they enter after flight, the failure to claim is considered a relevant consideration to impugn the credibility of a claimant, provided it is not the sole basis of the credibility finding (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). It should also be noted that the United States is a designated country under section 101(1)
(e)
of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,
SC 2001, c 27 (see
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227, s 159.3), and therefore claimants arriving through the US are not normally eligible for referral to the Board. In the circumstances, the Board did in fact consider the Applicant's explanation that he thought refugees were ill-treated in the US, but did not accept it, and considered it to be one element amongst many that impugned the Applicant's credibility. On this point alone, I do not think the Board's reasoning was unreasonable.
[29]
As for the Board's assessment of the Applicant's
sur place
claim, the Board was certainly entitled to import its credibility findings to determine the
bona fide
of that claim. In other words, if indeed the Applicant has fabricated his story to claim refugee protection, a reasonable inference could be drawn that his current knowledge and participation in Christianity in Canada was acquired after his arrival to Canada, to support that fraudulent claim. The problem here is that the findings of the Board with respect to the genuineness of the Applicant's story are themselves open to question and are fraught with a number of deficiencies. In such a context, the inference drawn by the Board is unwarranted and it would be unreasonable to assume that the evidence relating to the Applicant's knowledge of Christianity and to his attendance of a church in Canada was fabricated in order to bolster his refugee claim.
V.
Conclusion
[30]
For all of the foregoing reasons, I find that this application for judicial review must be granted. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the lack of documentary evidence is sufficient to uphold the Board's decision, despite the serious flaws of its credibility analysis. It is no doubt true that a refugee claim must be established on the basis of both a subjective and objective fear of persecution. In the case at bar, however, the country condition evidence is far from compelling one way or another, and the appraisal of the situation on the ground cannot be totally divorced from the assessment of the Applicant's story. Accordingly, this file deserves to be reconsidered by another member of the Board, with due consideration of these reasons.
JUDGMENT
[31]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application for judicial review is granted. No question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  La Cour est saisie d'une demande d'autorisation et de contrôle judiciaire de la décision rendue par la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Commission), le 13 novembre 2013, par laquelle la Commission a rejeté la demande d'asile présentée par M. Hongxin Sun (le demandeur) en raison du manque de crédibilité. Le demandeur soutient qu'il craint la persécution de la part des autorités chinoises parce qu'il est chrétien et qu'il est membre d'une église protestante clandestine.
[2]
Pour les motifs énoncés ci-dessous, la Cour conclut que la présente demande doit être accueillie.
I.
Les faits
[3]
Le demandeur, un citoyen de la République populaire de Chine, vivait avec son épouse et son fils dans la ville de Yanji, dans la province de Jilin.
[4]
Le demandeur soutient qu'il a souffert de problèmes gastriques qui se sont aggravés en mars 2010 malgré un traitement médical. Les dossiers médicaux du demandeur révèlent que celui-ci a consulté un gastroentérologue de façon régulière de juillet 2009 à mars 2010, date à laquelle il a commencé à consulter un spécialiste de la médecine traditionnelle chinoise, et ce, jusqu'au 17 avril 2010.
[5]
Le demandeur affirme qu'à la mi-avril 2010, son ami Liang Wang l'a initié à Jésus-Christ. Liang Wang lui a dit que Jésus-Christ avait guéri son asthme allergique, lui a donné une Bible et lui a appris à prier. Il soutient qu'au cours du mois suivant, Liang Wang a prié pour lui et que son état s'est amélioré jusqu'à la mi-mai 2010, quand ses douleurs à l'estomac ont disparu. Le demandeur fait valoir qu'il s'est ensuite joint à la même église clandestine que Liang Wang; il a assisté à un office religieux pour la première fois le 23 mai 2010. Il affirme qu'il a été baptisé le 25 décembre 2010, qu'il a reçu la communion sainte pour la première fois le même jour et qu'il a assisté à l'office religieux chaque semaine.
[6]
Le demandeur soutient également qu'il a commencé à faire le guet pour le compte de l'église clandestine et a initié de proches parents et amis à la foi. Il affirme qu'il a initié son ami De Cai Liu à la foi, et celui-ci s'est joint à l'église en janvier 2011.
[7]
Le demandeur soutient que le 26 juin 2011, le Bureau de la sécurité publique (BSP) a fait une descente dans l'église clandestine, mais que les membres avaient été avertis par un surveillant, qu'il avait donc réussi à s'échapper et à se cacher chez un ami. Le lendemain, les agents du BSP se seraient rendus chez lui pour l'arrêter et auraient interrogé sa famille afin de savoir où il était. Selon le demandeur, les agents du BSP sont revenus chez lui pour l'arrêter sept autres fois et ont montré un mandat d'arrestation à son épouse le 11 octobre 2011. Son épouse lui a dit que trois membres de l'église, notamment Liang Wang, avaient été arrêtés et étaient détenus. Dans son Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) modifié, le demandeur a ajouté que son épouse s'était rendue au BSP en novembre 2011 afin de demander une copie du mandat d'arrestation, mais qu'elle a essuyé un refus.
[8]
Dans son FRP, le demandeur a souligné qu'il a embauché un passeur responsable de l'aider à obtenir un visa des États-Unis et à quitter le pays. Il a affirmé qu'il est d'abord allé à Seattle, le 17 septembre 2011, et qu'ensuite il a traversé la frontière à pied, et est arrivé à Vancouver le 20 septembre 2011. Il a déposé sa demande d'asile le 22 septembre 2011. À l'audience, le demandeur a expliqué que le passeur a utilisé son véritable passeport pour faire les démarches relatives à l'obtention d'un visa des États-Unis et qu'il a passé une entrevue à l'ambassade des États-Unis à Beijing à cette fin. À la question de savoir comment il avait réussi à quitter le pays alors qu'il faisait l'objet d'un mandat d'arrestation, le demandeur a répondu que le passeur avait versé un pot-de-vin aux douaniers. Interrogé afin de savoir pourquoi il n'avait pas demandé l'asile aux États-Unis, le demandeur a répondu que le passeur lui avait dit que sa demande avait plus de chances de succès au Canada, et que les réfugiés étaient traités comme des détenus aux États-Unis.
II.
La décision contestée
[9]
La Commission a reconnu que le demandeur avait souffert de problèmes gastriques, mais a affirmé qu'elle « ne croit à peu près rien, voire absolument rien, des allégations que le demandeur d'asile a formulées au sujet de la persécution dont il était victime en Chine ».
[10]
Premièrement, la Commission a conclu que le demandeur a inventé toute l'histoire de sa guérison miraculeuse, de son appartenance à une église clandestine, de la descente de la police et de l'arrestation subséquente, et qu'il n'était pas chrétien. La Commission a relevé les incohérences et les invraisemblances suivantes dans le témoignage du demandeur:
À la question de savoir pourquoi Liang Wang l'a initié à Jésus-Christ seulement en avril 2010, alors qu'il connaissait les problèmes de santé du demandeur depuis près d'un an, le demandeur a donné une réponse évasive et insatisfaisante.
À la question de savoir comment il savait que Dieu l'avait guéri, et non pas les médicaments, le demandeur a répondu qu'il avait cessé de prendre ses médicaments et qu'il a été guéri grâce aux prières de son ami. La Commission, qui a estimé que sa réponse était déraisonnablement vague et évasive, et a conclu que « la guérison de son ulcère de l'estomac ne relève pas d'un miracle ».
Bien que le demandeur ait déclaré qu'il a été initié à Jésus-Christ à la mi-mai 2010 et a été guéri environ au même moment (guérison instantanée), il a aussi affirmé qu'il a été guéri lorsque ces amis et lui ont prié à cette fin chaque jour (guérison graduelle).
Lorsque le demandeur a été questionné sur la réaction de son épouse aux événements, le demandeur a répondu que son épouse a été témoin de sa guérison miraculeuse et qu'elle croyait que Dieu l'avait guéri, mais qu'elle ne s'était pas convertie à la religion et qu'elle était athée.
Lorsque le demandeur a été interrogé au sujet de son ami De Cai Liu, il a répondu que Dieu avait guéri son ami d'une dépression, mais cet élément important n'a pas été mentionné dans le FRP du demandeur.
Interrogé afin de savoir pourquoi il pensait que De Cai Liu était convaincu du miracle de Dieu, contrairement à son épouse, il a répondu qu'il croyait à la liberté de religion et qu'il n'imposerait pas sa foi à son épouse. La Commission a conclu que cette explication ne répondait pas à la question et qu'elle était évasive.
Bien que la Commission ait reconnu que le demandeur avait certaines connaissances de Dieu et de la Bible, cette reconnaissance était peu concluante eu égard à la pratique de sa foi en Chine, car il fréquentait une église au Canada depuis son arrivée. La Commission a conclu que rien ne prouvait de façon convaincante que le demandeur était en mesure de parler des préceptes du christianisme.
[11]
La Commission a ensuite souligné que le demandeur n'avait produit aucun élément de preuve indépendant corroborant son témoignage. En ce qui concerne la copie du mandat d'arrestation, la Commission a conclu qu'il était possible, mais peu probable, au vu des documents sur la situation dans le pays, que le BSP refuserait d'en donner une copie à son épouse. La Commission a aussi relevé que le demandeur avait d'abord déclaré qu'il ne faisait l'objet d'aucun mandat d'arrestation. Bien que le demandeur ait expliqué qu'il a mal compris la question et qu'il croyait que la Commission lui demandait si les policiers avaient un mandat d'arrestation la première fois qu'ils sont allés chez lui, la Commission a conclu que la question était claire et que l'explication donnée était insuffisante.
[12]
En ce qui concerne sa fréquentation d'une église chrétienne au Canada et son baptême à cet endroit, la Commission a souligné que le demandeur a présenté des éléments de preuve de sa fréquentation, mais que cette fréquentation n'établissait pas que le demandeur était réellement de confession chrétienne. La Commission en est aussi venue à la conclusion qu'elle avait le droit d'importer une conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité d'une demande d'asile sur place et que le fait que le demandeur fréquente une église au Canada avait vraisemblablement pour but d'appuyer sa demande d'asile.
[13]
En ce qui a trait au récit du passage de clandestins, la Commission a conclu qu'il n'était pas vraisemblable que le demandeur soit en mesure de se déplacer en Chine et de quitter le pays muni de son véritable passeport, sans obstacle, alors qu'il faisait l'objet d'un prétendu mandat d'arrestation. La Commission a relevé que les documents sur la situation dans le pays démontrent l'existence d'une base de données nationale de la police. Bien qu'elle reconnaisse que la corruption est fréquente en Chine, la Commission a rejeté l'explication selon laquelle le passeur aurait versé un pot-de-vin à un douanier et elle a précisé que si le BSP avait été tant résolu à arrêter le demandeur, celui-ci aurait été arrêté malgré le versement d'un seul pot-de-vin.
[14]
En outre, la Commission a conclu que l'explication donnée par le demandeur pour justifier les raisons pour lesquelles il n'a pas présenté de demande d'asile aux États-Unis était insatisfaisante. La Commission a relevé que le demandeur connaissait le processus de demande d'asile des États-Unis et qu'il n'aurait pas raté l'occasion d'y demander l'asile s'il éprouvait réellement une crainte subjective de persécution.
[15]
La Commission a aussi tenu compte des documents sur la situation dans le pays concernant la persécution des chrétiens en Chine. Elle a conclu que les incidents étaient rares et exceptionnels dans la province de Jilin, et qu'il n'y avait pas de preuve de poursuite pour prosélytisme dans la province de Jilin. La Commission a donc conclu qu'il était possible, quoique peu probable, qu'une descente ait eu lieu dans une église dans la province de Jilin.
III.
La question en litige
[16]
la présente affaire ne soulève qu'une seule question en litige: la conclusion de la Commission quant à la crédibilité est-elle raisonnable?
IV.
Analyse
[17]
La norme de contrôle concernant les conclusions relatives à la crédibilité tirée par la Commission est indubitablement celle de la décision raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), 160 NR 31, au paragraphe 4 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[18]
La Cour souscrit à l'avis de l'avocate du demandeur, qui soutient que les conclusions de la Commission relatives à la crédibilité sont ténues et qu'elles manquent de transparence et d'intelligibilité. En fait, la Commission avait de sérieux doutes quant à la question de savoir si le demandeur avait guéri miraculeusement en raison de sa croyance en Jésus-Christ. Ce scepticisme teinte toute la décision. À des fins de clarté, la Commission a relevé, au paragraphe 16 de ses motifs qu'« il n'est peut-être pas important de savoir si ce sont les médicaments ou les prières qui sont à l'origine de la prétendue guérison du demandeur d'asile; ce qui importe, c'est que ce dernier [traduction] « croie » [c'est le tribunal qui met entre guillemets] que les prières l'ont guéri ». Le problème réside dans le fait que l'essentiel des motifs de la Commission ne concorde pas avec cette mise en garde.
[19]
Tout d'abord, la Commission semble croire que le demandeur a donné à penser qu'il avait guéri instantanément en mai 2010. Toutefois, une lecture attentive du dossier révèle que le demandeur n'a jamais dit qu'il a été initié au Christ en mai 2010. Il a invariablement déclaré qu'il avait été
initié
au Christ en avril 2010, que son ami et lui avaient prié régulièrement par la suite, et qu'il avait
accueilli
le Christ lorsqu'il a guéri de sa maladie à la mi-mai 2010. Comme il a toujours décrit un processus graduel, la Cour estime que la conclusion de la Commission à cet égard n'est pas fondée sur les éléments de preuve.
[20]
Le scepticisme de la Commission au sujet de la foi du demandeur ressort du paragraphe suivant:
[15] Le demandeur d'asile a déclaré qu'il avait été initié au christianisme à la mi-mai 2010 et il a affirmé: [traduction] « à la mi-mai 2010, je ne souffrais plus d'aucune douleur à l'estomac ». Cela ressemble à une guérison instantanée. Selon la preuve dont le tribunal dispose, il ne s'agit toutefois pas d'une guérison instantanée, car le demandeur d'asile a déclaré ceci: [traduction] « Je ne prenais plus aucun médicament. Je prie tous les jours, et mes amis ont prié eux aussi. C'est ainsi que mes douleurs à l'estomac ont disparu. » Sa guérison a donc été graduelle, et non instantanée, car elle est le résultat d'une série de prières quotidiennes. Parmi les éléments de preuve présentés au tribunal, aucun ne permet de savoir combien de prières ont été faites ni pendant combien de temps ces gens ont prié. Rien ne montre non plus que le demandeur d'asile a cessé de prendre ses médicaments avant la mi-mai 2010. En fait, le demandeur d'asile a affirmé ce qui suit dans son témoignage: [traduction] « Lorsque mon ami m'a parlé de Dieu, j'ai arrêté de prendre mes médicaments [...] » Bref, il a cessé de prendre ses médicaments à la mi-mai et il a été guéri à la mi-mai également. Si le demandeur d'asile a bel et bien été guéri de ses problèmes de santé, il n'avait aucun moyen de savoir que c'était grâce aux prières, et non aux médicaments qu'il avait pris, selon la preuve, jusqu'à la mi-mai, moment où il a été guéri selon ses dires. Il est raisonnable de croire que certains médicaments prennent plus de temps que d'autres à faire effet et que certains peuvent n'avoir aucun effet. Ainsi, il est possible que les médicaments n'aient commencé à agir pour lui qu'environ au même moment où il a cessé de les prendre et où il a commencé à prier.
[21]
Je souscris à l'argument de l'avocate du demandeur, qui soutient que la question de savoir si le « miracle » de la guérison du demandeur s'est réellement produit n'est pas pertinente. La Commission peut ne pas être du même avis que le demandeur quant à savoir que Dieu est à l'origine de sa guérison sur le plan médical, mais cela ne signifie pas que le demandeur n'y croit pas sincèrement et qu'il n'est pas un chrétien pratiquant pouvant être exposé à la persécution. Le demandeur a expliqué qu'il a cessé de prendre ses médicaments en avril 2010 et qu'il s'était mis à prier et que c'est pour cela qu'il croit que Dieu l'a guéri en mai 2010. Humblement, la Cour ne comprend pas comment cette explication est vague ou évasive. L'explication répond clairement à la question de la Commission et elle n'est pas incohérente. L'explication peut ne pas être suffisante pour convaincre le commissaire de se convertir lui-même au christianisme, mais tel n'était pas l'objectif. Évidemment, un demandeur d'asile n'est pas tenu de prouver qu'une intervention divine a eu lieu pour établir sa crainte d'être persécuté pour des raisons religieuses. Le rôle de la Commission ne consiste pas à tirer des conclusions de fait sur des miracles.
[22]
Les croyances religieuses de l'épouse du demandeur sont tout aussi peu importantes. La Cour reconnaît que les réponses du demandeur au sujet des croyances de son épouse portaient à confusion. D'une part, il soutenait que son épouse croyait que Dieu l'avait guéri, mais d'autre part, il disait qu'elle n'était pas intéressée à la religion et qu'elle était athée. Lorsque la Commission lui a demandé comment elle pourrait croire que Dieu l'a guéri et aussi être athée, il a répondu qu'elle avait été témoin de son rétablissement et de ses prières et a précisé ceci: [traduction] « Elle devait présumer que c'était Dieu qui m'avait guéri. » Il était certainement loisible à la Commission de conclure que les explications du demandeur concernant les croyances de son épouse portaient à confusion et étaient difficiles à suivre, voire contradictoires. Toutefois, les croyances de l'épouse du demandeur ne sont pas pertinentes dans la demande d'asile et elles n'ont aucune incidence sur les croyances personnelles du demandeur ou la véracité de ses allégations concernant la descente dans l'église. Les incohérences dans les éléments de preuve doivent être suffisamment graves et reliées à des matières suffisamment pertinentes pour justifier la conclusion d'absence de crédibilité:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[23]
Il en va de même en ce qui concerne la façon dont la Commission a analysé le témoignage du demandeur sur la conversion de son ami De Cai Liu. La Commission a reproché au demandeur d'avoir mentionné, uniquement dans son témoignage de vive voix - en réponse à une question de la Commission - que De Cai Liu souffrait de dépression. La Cour ne comprend pas pourquoi la Commission a jugé problématique le fait que le demandeur n'avait pas mentionné ce détail dans l'exposé circonstancié de son FRP. Il ne s'agissait pas d'un fait essentiel lié aux croyances du demandeur et à la descente de la police. En outre, cette omission n'a jamais été portée à l'attention du demandeur à l'audience. De plus, il était tout à fait inapproprié de chercher à savoir pourquoi le demandeur avait réuss cinq i à convaincre De Cai Liu - et non son épouse - d'accueillir Jésus, car il s'agit de questions personnelles, qui sont hors du contrôle du demandeur et qui n'ont aucune incidence sur ses propres croyances. Enfin, la Cour est d'avis que les commentaires suivants sont tout à fait inappropriés et déplacés:
Le demandeur d'asile a expliqué que De Cai Liu souffrait de dépression et avait consulté des médecins, mais que ceux-ci n'avaient pas réussi à le soigner lui non plus (les médecins n'ont apparemment rien pu faire contre l'asthme de Liang Wang, la dépression de De Cai Liu et l'ulcère du demandeur d'asile). Il semblerait que ces personnes ont été aux prises avec des souches très récalcitrantes de différentes maladies en l'espace de quelques mois. Ces maladies exigent une intervention divine, car les médecins semblent impuissants à leur égard.
[24]
Dans l'ensemble, les motifs de la Commission, en ce qui a trait au témoignage du demandeur, sont remplis de sarcasmes et indûment centrés sur des incohérences négligeables et sans importance. La Commission est même allée jusqu'à tirer une inférence défavorable quant à la crédibilité du fait que le demandeur a commencé ses réponses, à deux reprises, par le terme « premièrement ». Bien que la Cour soit prête à accepter que les réponses du demandeur aux questions de la Commission étaient parfois confuses, la Cour est préoccupée, car l'analyse de la Commission est teintée par son scepticisme relativement à l'allégation du demandeur concernant sa guérison miraculeuse. Au lieu d'évaluer la sincérité des croyances du demandeur et la véracité de son récit concernant la descente dans l'église, la Commission a accordé un poids non mérité à des détails mineurs, a relevé des incohérences dans des apparences de divergences pour lesquelles le demandeur a fourni des explications raisonnables, et a douté de sa foi en raison du comportement d'autres personnes dont le demandeur ne peut être tenu responsable. Pour ces motifs, la Cour est disposée à conclure que l'évaluation de la Commission quant à la crédibilité du demandeur était viciée et manquait de transparence et d'intelligibilité.
[25]
La Commission a aussi conclu, à partir des documents sur la situation dans le pays, qu'il était plus probable que le contraire que les autorités chinoises auraient fourni, à la demande, une copie d'une sommation ou d'un mandat d'arrestation. D'après la Commission, l'omission de produire une copie du mandat d'arrestation donnait à penser que ce document n'existait tout simplement pas. Il est vrai que la Réponse à la demande d'information, citée par la Commission et traitant des mandats d'arrestation et des sommations, révèle que le BSP remet généralement une sommation à la personne, que le Bureau du procureur lancera un mandat d'arrestation après que le BSP eut terminé son enquête sur le dossier et dispose d'éléments établissant que le suspect a commis l'infraction criminelle, et qu'il est possible d'obtenir une copie de ces documents si la demande est faite au BSP. Toutefois, la même Réponse à la demande d'information précise aussi que la loi n'est pas appliquée de façon uniforme partout au pays. La Commission était certainement en droit de ne pas croire l'allégation du demandeur selon laquelle son épouse a demandé une copie du mandat d'arrestation, mais qu'elle a essuyé un refus. Cependant, la Commission ne pouvait pas se servir de la Réponse à la demande d'information comme fondement d'une telle conclusion sans examiner l'
avertissement
concernant les différences relatives à l'application de la loi dans le pays. En ce qui a trait à la contradiction que la Commission a relevée entre la déclaration du demandeur dans son FRP (à savoir que son épouse a vu un mandat, mais n'a pu en obtenir copie) et son témoignage (où il aurait apparemment affirmé qu'aucun mandat n'avait été délivré), une lecture attentive de la transcription révèle que la question était loin d'être claire et que le demandeur avait véritablement mal compris la question.
[26]
La Commission a tiré une autre conclusion tout aussi contestable, à savoir qu'il était peu probable que le demandeur, qui faisait l'objet d'un mandat d'arrestation, arrive à utiliser son véritable passeport pour quitter la Chine sans être remarqué, en particulier après que le BSP se fut rendu chez lui huit fois à sa recherche comme il le prétend. La Commission fonde principalement sa conclusion sur une Réponse à la demande d'information mentionnant l'existence et le développement d'une base de données d'envergure nationale des forces de police chinoises et utilisée par le BSP et aussi aux ports d'entrée et de sortie du pays. Ce document précise également qu'il reste du travail à faire en ce qui concerne l'échange de renseignements entre les services policiers régionaux. La Commission a elle-même reconnu qu'il existe une grande liberté de décision en matière administrative partout en Chine et que la corruption est fréquente en Chine. Il est bien établi qu'il n'est possible de conclure à l'invraisemblance que dans les « cas les plus évidents » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) lorsque [traduction] « les faits tels qu'ils ont été présentés sortent tellement de l'ordinaire que le juge des faits peut avec raison conclure qu'il est impossible que l'événement en question se soit produit » (Lorne Waldman,
Immigration Law and Practice,
Markham (Ont.), Butterworths, 1992, article 8.22, cité au paragraphe 24 de la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Comme la Commission a elle-même reconnu que la corruption est fréquente et qu'il est possible que les renseignements ne soient pas communiqués efficacement, la Commission ne pouvait pas conclure que le récit du demandeur était invraisemblable. La conclusion selon laquelle le demandeur ne pouvait, selon toute vraisemblance, s'être déplacé en Chine pour présenter une demande de visa des États-Unis sans être remarqué s'appuie elle aussi entièrement sur des conjectures; cette conclusion n'est fondée sur aucun élément de preuve.
[27]
La Cour a les mêmes réserves quant à la façon dont la Commission a évalué les éléments de preuve concernant la fréquence des actes de persécution à l'égard des chrétiens dans la province de Jilin. La Commission pouvait raisonnablement conclure que les incidents de cette nature étaient rares dans la province du Jilin et parmi les moins graves en Chine, et qu'il existe moins qu'une simple possibilité qu'il y a eu une descente dans une église dans cette province. Néanmoins, la Commission a reconnu que le rapport de l'Association d'aide à la Chine, sur lequel elle s'est fondée, mentionne qu'il ne faut pas confondre les incidents déclarés et les incidents réels, car les incidents déclarés ne représentent que la pointe de l'iceberg. Par conséquent, cet élément de preuve documentaire n'ajoute peut-être pas de poids au témoignage du demandeur ou ne prouve pas que la descente à l'église a bien eu lieu, mais il ne peut pas non plus servir à douter de la véracité objective de la crainte de persécution du demandeur.
[28]
En ce qui concerne l'inférence défavorable tirée quant à la crainte subjective du demandeur du fait qu'il n'a pas demandé l'asile aux États-Unis, la Commission n'a pas commis d'erreur. Bien que les demandeurs d'asile ne soient pas tenus de présenter une demande d'asile dans le premier pays où ils arrivent après s'être enfuis, le défaut de demander l'asile est considéré comme un facteur pertinent dans l'appréciation de la crédibilité d'un demandeur, à condition que la décision relative à la crédibilité ne s'appuie pas uniquement sur ce critère (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Il convient également de souligner que les États-Unis sont un pays désigné pour l'application de l'alinéa 101(1)
e
) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (voir l'article 159.3 du
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2002-227). Par conséquent, les demandes présentées par des demandeurs en provenance des États-Unis ne peuvent généralement pas être déférées à la Commission. Dans les circonstances, la Commission a effectivement tenu compte de l'explication du demandeur, selon laquelle il pensait que les réfugiés étaient mal traités aux États-Unis, mais ne l'a pas acceptée. La Commission a estimé qu'il s'agissait d'un élément parmi beaucoup d'autres qui ont miné la crédibilité du demandeur. Sur ce seul aspect, la Cour n'est pas d'avis que le raisonnement de la Commission était déraisonnable.
[29]
En ce qui a trait à l'évaluation faite par la Commission de la demande sur place du demandeur, la Commission était certainement en droit d'importer ses conclusions relatives à la crédibilité pour évaluer le bien-fondé de cette demande. Autrement dit, si le demandeur a réellement inventé son récit pour demander l'asile, il serait raisonnable de tirer l'inférence que ses connaissances actuelles sur le christianisme et sa pratique du christianisme au Canada ont été acquises après son arrivée ici afin d'appuyer sa demande frauduleuse. En l'espèce, le problème réside dans le fait que les conclusions de la Commission relatives au caractère authentique du récit du demandeur peuvent elles-mêmes être mises en doute et comportent un certain nombre de lacunes. Dans cette situation, l'inférence tirée par la Commission n'est pas justifiée et il serait déraisonnable de supposer que les éléments de preuve concernant les connaissances du demandeur au sujet du christianisme et sa fréquentation d'une église au Canada ont été inventés pour appuyer sa demande d'asile.
V.
Conclusion
[30]
Pour tous les motifs susmentionnés, la Cour conclut que la demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être accueillie. L'avocat du défendeur soutient que le manque d'éléments de preuve documentaire suffit à maintenir la décision de la Commission, malgré les graves lacunes de l'analyse quant à la crédibilité. Il est indubitable qu'une demande d'asile doit être fondée sur une crainte de persécution à la fois subjective et objective. Toutefois, en l'espèce, les éléments de preuve sur la situation dans le pays sont loin d'être convaincants, dans un sens comme dans l'autre, et l'appréciation de la situation sur place ne peut être entièrement dissociée de l'évaluation du récit du demandeur. Par conséquent, le présent dossier mérite d'être examiné à nouveau par un autre commissaire, qui tiendra dûment compte des présents motifs.
JUGEMENT
[31]
LA COUR STATUE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]