[1]
Martin, J.
: The plaintiff, the Canadian Olympic Association, seeks to restrain by way of an interlocutory injunction the defendant, Konica Canada Inc., from adopting or using any of the plaintiff's trademarks contrary to ss. 9 and 11 of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10.
[2]
The plaintiff is a public authority within the meaning of s. 9(1)(n)(iii) of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) (F.C.A.)) which owns as official marks "Olympic", "Winter Olympics" and "Summer Olympics" among others. It raises money for its purposes by selling the right to use these marks. The amount of money which the plaintiff can get for the sale of the right to use its marks is significantly dependent upon the exclusivity of the right.
[3]
Any use of the mark, authorized or unauthorized, diminishes the residual value of the mark to the plaintiff and thus the amount which the plaintiff can charge to subsequent applicants for the right to use it. Because the events with which the plaintiff's marks are associated occur in the span of a single year the plaintiff's ability to raise money by selling the right to use its marks is extremely limited. It must, of necessity, be vigilant about any possible infringement of its rights.
[4]
The defendant, Konica Canada Inc., is a dealer in photographic film which is promoting the sale of certain of its film products by marketing them in physical association with an adaptation of the Guinness Book of Olympic Records.
[5]
Counsel for the plaintiff says the plaintiff does not object to the publication and sale of the Guinness Book of Olympic Records but does object to the association of Konica's name and product with the plaintiff's marks in the packaged form in which the film is offered for sale to the public. In this respect Exhibit "B" to the affidavit of Andrew Scammell, the General Sales Manager of Konica, was introduced in evidence. Exhibit "B" consists of a cellophane "shrink wrapped" 17 x 20 cm. package containing three packages of Konica colour film placed end to end and to the left of the Guinness Book of Olympic Records.
[6]
The book is not the regular edition but is what is termed as a premium edition. The difference between the premium and regular edition is that the first and last pages and both covers of the premium edition are prepared specifically for the party, in this case Konica, which wishes to use the book as a promotional device. In Exhibit "B" the defendant has used all eight surfaces of the first and last pages and covers of the book to promote itself and its products.
[7]
Of particular interest is the front cover of the premium edition because it, along with the two ends and six sides of the three boxes of film, is what a purchaser sees when he looks at the shrink wrapped package. He will note immediately that the front cover has been colour coordinated with the film packages both of which have a dark blue and rainbow coloured motif with the name "Konica" in large white letters.
[8]
Beneath the name "Konica" on the cover of the book, in red letters slightly smaller than those used for the word "Konica", is "Guinness Book of" and under those words in extra large gold letters "Olympic Records". This is followed below by "The Complete 1988 Winter & Summer Olympic Schedule" in red letters of about the same size as those used for the words "Guinness Book of".
[9]
The defendant has distributed some 22,000 of these packages, has sold an additional 78,000 which it has not yet distributed to its customers, the individual retailers, and has ordered another 25,000 for distribution. Konica states that prior to purchasing and undertaking the distribution of its shrink wrapped package it enquired and was assured by the publishers of the Guinness Book of Olympic Records that it had been published without complaint from anyone since 1967, including a 1984 premium edition advertising "Old Spice" some 25,000 copies of which were sent to Canada for distribution. In addition to the Konica and Old Spice premium editions the defendant produced premium editions for the 1976, 1980 and 1984 Olympic Games showing use of the book as a premium by such well known organizations as RCA, AT&T, and the Bell System Yellow Pages.
[10]
The issue in this action is whether the defendants have adopted or used the plaintiff's trademarks contrary to ss. 9 and 11 of the Act. That of course is not the issue in this application which is directed more towards the
likelihood
that Konica's actions which I have described are contrary to ss. 9 and 11 of the Act.
[11]
Section 9(1)(n)(iii) prohibits the adoption by others of a trademark adopted by a public authority in the following terms:
"9.(1) No person shall adopt in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any mark consisting of, or so nearly resembling as to be likely to be mistaken for
...
(n) any badge, crest, emblem or mark
...
(iii) adopted and used by any public authority in Canada as an official mark for wares or services,
in respect of which the Registrar has, at the request of Her Majesty or of the university or public authority as the case may be, given public notice of its adoption and use;"
[12]
Section 11 prevents the use of a public authority's adopted trademark:
"(11) No person shall use in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any mark adopted contrary to section 9 or 10 of this Act or contrary to section 13 or 14 of the Unfair Competition Act, chapter 274 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952. 1952-53, c. 49, s. 11."
[13]
"Use" in relation to a trademark is defined in s. 2 of the Act as meaning:
"(2) ... any use that by section 4 is deemed to be a use in association with wares or services;"
[14]
Finally s. 4(1) describes when a trademark is deemed to be used in association with wares in the following terms:
"(1) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of such wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred."
[15]
In the present matter the business of Konica, among other things, consists of the sale and distribution of rolls of 35mm colour film. The films are normally marketed in small cardboard or heavy paper boxes slightly larger than the standard roll of 35mm film. In this form there is no association with the trademarks of the plaintiff and it cannot be said that the plaintiff's marks have been adopted or used.
[16]
Insofar as Konica's film is marketed in the shrink package, however, I am satisfied that, in the language of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  plaintiff's marks are not marked on the films themselves, the metal containers in which the films are placed, the cardboard or heavy paper boxes in which the metal containers are sold, or even on the shrink package in which the three packages of 35mm film are marketed together with the premium edition of the Guinness Book of Olympic Records.
[17]
However, by being shrink wrapped in cellophane in the same package with the film, the book, which in that form cannot be opened presents only its front cover to the prospective purchaser. In this form the packaging of the book, in my view, has lost some of its character as a book in which the cover is only an incidental part of the larger whole. Here it is legitimately arguable that it is the cover, with the plaintiff's marks, which is being used as the primary marketing tool to direct the attention of the purchaser to some sort of association between Konica's films and the 1988 Winter and Summer Olympic Games. Because the plaintiff's marks can be seen on (or, in this case, in) the packages in which Konica's films are distributed it is open to a court to find that the plaintiff's marks have been or are being used in association with the sale and distribution of Konica's film contrary to s. 11 of the Act.
[18]
I say it is open to a court to find that Konica's promotional package marketing of its film offends s. 11 of the Act because it is possible that the court may find otherwise. It is also open to a court to find that it is not the plaintiff's marks which have been used to promote the sale of Konica's film but the Guinness Book, to the title and description of which the plaintiff does not object. Because there is nothing in the shrink wrapped package, either on the boxes containing the film or the book, to suggest that either is the authorized, designated, official, associated, sponsored or licensed product of the plaintiff a court may distinguish between an intention to profit or trade on the 1988 Winter and Summer Olympic Game trademarks and an intention to trade or profit on the historical records and schedule of the games and dismiss the plaintiff's action.
[19]
The plaintiff's evidence establishes that there is a substantial question to be tried and Konica has established an arguable defence. Because this is not a case of a clear infringement, a blatant case or obvious piracy I have considered the question of irreparable harm and balance of convenience before making my determination ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. In this respect, I have concluded that the balance weighs in favour of the plaintiff and will allow the application.
[20]
In his affidavit filed in support of this motion Andrew Scammell deposed that an interim injunction would cause irreparable harm and unquantifiable damage as it would effectively destroy the premium book as a promotional tool and erode the confidence of Konica's customers. However, in the cross-examination on his affidavit Scammell admitted that he could quantify Konica's losses should the injunction applied for be granted.
[21]
On the other hand if I refuse the injunction and it should subsequently be determined that the plaintiff's application should have been allowed, I am satisfied that harm would result to the plaintiff but it would be impossible to determine, with any degree of accuracy, the damages which the plaintiff would have sustained by way of lost sales of licensed wares upon which the plaintiff would have received a royalty or by reason of reduced licence fees it could obtain for licensing agreements by reason of the diminution in the exclusivity of its marks resulting from the use of them by Konica.
[22]
Counsel for the plaintiff cited  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  interlocutory injunction would be to determine, for all practical purposes, the substance of the claim, the plaintiff must establish more than that there is merely a serious issue to be tried.
[23]
Assuming that proposition to be accurate I fail to see how it has anything to do with this case. It is true that I am only prepared to find the plaintiff has established a serious issue to be tried but I cannot see how the grant of the interlocutory injunction determines, for any purpose, the substance of the plaintiff's claim.
[24]
The plaintiff has undertaken to indemnify Konica for any damage which it may suffer as a result of the granting of the interlocutory injunction should it be decided at trial the injunction should not have been granted. Presumably, convinced of the propriety of its position, Konica will proceed either by way of appeal from this order or to trial and, if successful, will recover from the plaintiff any damages which it will have sustained. The substance of Konica's claim can only be determined by further proceedings unless Konica itself elects to treat this order as final.
[25]
Because the harm to the plaintiff which will result from my refusing the application is unquantifiable and is likely to work a greater hardship on the plaintiff than the quantifiable harm which will result to Konica by my granting the application, I find that the balance of convenience weighs in favour of the plaintiff and will grant the application with costs to follow the event.
[26]
Although the plaintiff had discontinued its application for the interlocutory injunction against the defendant Brick Communications Ltd. prior to the hearing I allowed counsel for Brick to present argument, both as to the merits of the application and the question of costs. Counsel referred me to the decision of Mahoney, J. (then of the Trial Division of this court), in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as authority for the proposition that it would be proper for me, in exercising my discretion, to consider the effect on his client of granting the application.
[27]
He then referred me to paragraph 24 of the affidavit of Jim Brickman, the President of the defendant Brick Communications Ltd., in which the deponent claims the grant of the interlocutory injunction would cause irreparable harm to Brick's reputation as it would likely cause Brick to lose Konica and many other persons as clients which in turn "could lead to the loss of the company".
[28]
In my view paragraph 24 overstates the case and, in any event, is not supported by facts upon which I can assess its accuracy. In the cross-examination on his affidavit Brick says that premium merchandising accounts for 30-40% of his company's business; that since 1976 the company has only done premium promotions with books six or seven times, and that this is only the second time the company has done a promotion where the premium is attached or associated directly with the client's product at the point of retail sale.
[29]
Because no financial figures are given I am not able to assess with the slightest degree of accuracy the financial effect on Brick of my granting or refusing the plaintiff's application. Consequently the accuracy of the deponent's claim that his company might be lost if the application is granted is not supported by any evidence placed before me.
[30]
Furthermore, in his cross-examination, Brick admitted that Konica had not given any indication it would cease to do business with Brick if the plaintiff's application were granted and, because its other customers were not aware of the application, Brick had received no indication from any of them that they would discontinue doing business with his company.
[31]
Thus, once again, the evidence does not support the claim that there will be a substantial loss of Brick's clients should the order requested be granted.
[32]
I agree with counsel's suggestion that I should look to the effects on Brick of granting the order requested even though the plaintiff has discontinued the application as it relates to Brick. Having done so I have concluded that there is no evidence to support Brick's claim that it will suffer irreparable harm if the application is allowed and that, as between Brick and the plaintiff, the balance of convenience weighs heavily in favour of the plaintiff.
[33]
I would draw counsel's attention, as well, to the fact that the injunction granted is in severely limited terms. It restrains the defendant Konica from marketing its film in the packaged form of Exhibit "B" to the affidavit of Andrew Scammell dated the 13th day of November, 1987.
[34]
Counsel for Brick addressed me on the question of the costs of his client. I am satisfied that Brick should have been represented on this application even though the plaintiff had discontinued it against Brick. However I am likewise satisfied that its costs in respect of the application should follow the event.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]