 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board that Diaz was a Convention refugee and was not "excluded" from admission to Canada despite her lengthy record of criminal convictions in the United States. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application and remitted the matter to a different panel of the Board for reconsideration. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1326.4 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Refugee Protection Division and Refugee Appeal Division - Reasons - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1746 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1746 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Immigration - Exclusion - Particular persons - Persons convicted of crime - The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board that Diaz was a Convention refugee and was not "excluded" from admission to Canada despite her lengthy record of criminal convictions in the United States - The Federal Court allowed the application - The Board failed to apply the facts in the crime to Canadian criminal law - The Board erred in respect of the "10 year threshold" by considering the length of sentences actually imposed in the U.S. rather than the length of sentences that could be imposed in Canada - The Board further erred in its consideration of contextual matters - Personal circumstances were not included in the serious crime analysis - Factors such as age, economic condition or tragedy (such as rape) might have been relevant to sentencing in the U.S. but they did not address the seriousness of the offence itself - Lastly, the reasons were not adequate - It was not only difficult but impossible to divine the logic - It was unclear whether the conclusion on "seriousness" was based on the length of sentence imposed, the lack of equivalent Canadian law or the overriding impact of hardship suffered by  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 10]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refd to. [para. 10]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 13]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Gordon Lee, for the applicant; 
 
 D. Clifford Luyt, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 D. Clifford Luyt, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard on March 29, 2011, at Toronto, Ontario, by Phelan, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment at Ottawa, Ontario, on June 21, 2011. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Phelan, J. 
 : The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (Minister) seeks judicial review of a decision that Ms. Diaz (the Respondent) was a Convention refugee and was not "excluded" from admission to Canada despite her lengthy record of criminal convictions in the United States. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 BACKGROUND 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The Respondent, a citizen of Colombia, claims a fear of persecution by FARC. She says that she was raped by 15 FARC members because her mother refused to give FARC money. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  Ms. Diaz fled to the U.S. While there, she says that her mother and grandmother continued to be threatened by FARC. When they finally fled to the U.S. as well, Ms. Diaz was in jail on one of her numerous convictions. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  Ms. Diaz was deported from the U.S. to Colombia in 2002 but quickly returned to the U.S. illegally. She remained there until 2007, when she was once again deported to Colombia. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  This time Ms. Diaz left Colombia for Canada in 2008, again under a false passport. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  In the course of Ms. Diaz's time in the U.S. she was convicted seven times. The details of which are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 - 
 
 
 
 Date 
 
 
 
 Arrested by 
 
 
 
 Charge 
 
 
 
 Conviction 
 
 
 
 Sentence 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. 
 
 
 
 Oct. 12, 1996 
 
 
 
 NYPD 
 
 
 
 petit larceny; criminal possession of stolen property 
 
 
 
 petit larceny 
 
 
 
 6 months confinement 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. 
 
 
 
 Nov. 19, 1998 
 
 
 
 Bayonville (NJ) PD 
 
 
 
 theft 
 
 
 
 dismissed 
 
 
 
 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. 
 
 
 
 Jan. 26, 2001 
 
 
 
 NYPD 
 
 
 
 robbery; criminal possession of a weapon in the 4th degree 
 
 
 
 pleaded guilty to attempted robbery in the 3rd degree 
 
 
 
 6 months 4 days confinement 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.  
 
 
 
 Feb. 12, 2001 
 
 
 
 NYPD 
 
 
 
 robbery; attempted grand larceny 
 
 
 
 attempted grand larceny 
 
 
 
 6 months confinement 
 
 
 
 
 
 5. 
 
 
 
 Sept. 3, 2004 
 
 
 
 Doraville (GA) PD 
 
 
 
 criminal conspiracy; forgery 
 
 
 
 unknown 
 
 
 
 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.  
 
 
 
 Oct. 9, 2004 
 
 
 
 Gwinnet Cty (GA) PD 
 
 
 
 theft by shoplifting 
 
 
 
 theft by shoplifting 
 
 
 
 3 years probation 
 
 
 
 
 
 7. 
 
 
 
 Feb. 19, 2007 
 
 
 
 Dekalb City (GA) PD 
 
 
 
 financial transaction card theft 
 
 
 
 no disposition yet reached 
 
 
 
 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Immigration and Refugee Board (Board) found that there was a reasonable chance that Ms. Diaz (and her mother and grandmother) would be persecuted by FARC upon return to Colombia. The Board found that there was neither state protection nor a reasonable IFA. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The Board then went on to determine whether Ms. Diaz was excluded by operation of s. 98 and Article 1F(b) for having committed serious non-political crime(s). 
 
 
 
 98. A person referred to in section E or F of Article 1 of the Refugee Convention is not a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 98. La personne visée aux sections E ou F de l'article premier de la Convention sur les réfugiés ne peut avoir la qualité de réfugié ni de personne à protéger. 
 
 
 
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , S.C. 2001, c. 27 
 
 
 
 F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that: 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee; 
 
 
 
 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Article 1 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Board explained away the seriousness of some convictions by reference to mitigating factors, such as that Ms. Diaz had been a minor or had been raped. The Board explained away other offences on the grounds that they did not meet the "threshold penalty" of 10 years - a reference to s. 36(1)(b) of the Act. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The interpretation of s. 98 and Article 1F(b) of the Refugee Convention is a pure issue of law to which the correctness standard applies ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The same standard applies to "adequacy of reasons". The application of the facts to these provisions is a matter of mixed law and fact for which reasonableness is the standard of review ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  There are a number of problems with the Board's decision. The most fundamental is that the Board failed to apply the principles set out in  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which is the leading authority on exclusions under Article 1F(b). 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  In this regard the Board failed to apply the facts in the crime to Canadian criminal law. It did not ask what would be the result if those facts were heard by a Canadian court. Instead the Board looked for equivalent criminal provisions to those of the U.S. offences. That involved the Board probing into the legal elements of each U.S. provision rather than focusing on what Canadian criminal provision(s) would apply to the facts of each U.S. case. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The Board erred in respect of the "10 year threshold" by considering the length of sentence actually imposed in the U.S. rather than the length of sentences that could be imposed in Canada. The Board misapplied or misunderstood  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as supporting this threshold analysis. In  
 Hill 
 , above, the Federal Court of Appeal did not deal with Article 1F(b). 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The Board further erred in its consideration of contextual matters.  
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , specifically rejects inclusion of personal circumstances in the serious crime analysis. Factors such as age, economic condition or tragedy (such as rape) may have been relevant to sentencing in the U.S. but they do not address the seriousness of the offence itself. Taking these factors into account in balancing the seriousness of the offence distorts the picture of the offences themselves ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  While it is unnecessary to make a finding on the issue of well-founded fear - there being other grounds for quashing the decision - the Court has serious reservations with this finding. The finding is unduly brief and does not touch on credibility even in the face of discrepancies between the POE Notes and the Respondent's two PIFs. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Lastly, the reasons in this case are not adequate. It is not only difficult but impossible to divine the logic applied in respect of Article 1F(b). It is unclear whether the conclusion on "seriousness" was based on the length of sentence imposed, the lack of equivalent Canadian law or the overriding impact of hardship suffered by Ms. Diaz. 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  For these reasons, this judicial review is granted, the decision is quashed and the matter remitted back for a new consideration before a different panel. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Applicant had proposed a question for certification to which the Respondent did not object. Given these reasons, the proposed question is academic and I see no other question for certification. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [19] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
  the application for judicial review is granted, the decision is quashed and the matter is to be remitted back for a new consideration before a different panel. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Anick Ouellette-Levesque/vnh 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



