 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 June 3, 1994. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 A Jehovah's Witness from Poland moved to adduce fresh evidence in his application for judicial review of the Convention Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board's refusal of his claim for Convention refugee status. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, dismissed the motion. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 4071 
 
 Practice - Judicial review - Fresh evidence - A Jehovah's Witness from Poland claimed Convention refugee status on the ground that he feared that he would be imprisoned for evasion of military service or forced to perform regular military service against his beliefs - The Convention Refugee Board denied his claim on the ground that Poland had programmes of alternative service - In his application for judicial review the claimant moved to adduce a newspaper article as fresh evidence - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, stated that the test for the introduction of new evidence in criminal appeals was not relevant - The court dismissed the motion because the article was of marginal relevance and it could have been introduced before the Board's decision was delivered. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 22 (Eng.); 106 D.L.R.(3d) 212; 50 C.C.C.(2d) 193; 17 C.R.(3d) 34 (Fr.), refd to. [para. 8]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, sect. 18.1(4) [para. 8]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 A. Duncan D. Johnstone, for the applicant; 
 
 Alice Abbott, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 A. Duncan D. Johnstone, Hamilton, Ontario, for the applicant; 
 
 John C. Tait, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was dealt with in writing without the appearance of parties by Simpson, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following decision on June 3, 1994. 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Simpson, J. 
 : Artur Franz (the "Applicant") moves in the course of his application for leave for judicial review to adduce fresh evidence in support of his claim for Convention Refugee status (the "Claim"). The Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board") denied the Applicant's Claim in a decision dated August 16, 1993 (the "Decision"). An Application for Leave and for Judicial Review was filed on September 1, 1993 and this Motion was brought on November 4, 1993. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The Applicant is a Jehovah's Witness who fears that, on his return to Poland, he will either be imprisoned for evasion of military service or forced to perform regular military service against his beliefs. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The Board held its hearing on June 7, 1993 and concluded in its decision that the Applicant had a reasonable expectation of being permitted to enter a programme of alternative service. The Board based its conclusion, in part, on an Amnesty International memorandum dated December 1992 which indicated that, in the Warsaw district in 1991 and in early 1992, a significant proportion of applications for alternative service were granted (147 of 162 applications in 1991 and 276 of 319 applications in the first six months of 1992). However, that memorandum did not provide any statistics on the treatment of Jehovahs' Witnesses or any statistics for other regions. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The Applicant received a newspaper article (the "Article") from his parents on or about June 28, 1993. It indicated that, of 6,000 applications for substitute service in 1993, barely one half were accepted. The Article did not discuss the treatment of applicants who were Jehovahs' Witnesses. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The Board's Decision discloses that the Applicant gave evidence about his fear that the likelihood of his acceptance for alternative military service had worsened since his arrival in Canada in 1989. The Board had regard both to a number of Polish newspaper articles in 1992 and 1993 on the subject of alternative service and to letters from the Applicant's family commenting on those articles. The Applicant's counsel entered those articles as exhibits to demonstrate that the climate in Poland was worsening for those who objected to military service. However, those documents contradicted his client's position because they indicated that Jehovahs' Witnesses were exempt from military service. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The decision makes it clear that general statistics on alternative service were relevant at the hearing but that material relating to the treatment of Jehovahs' Witnesses was of greater relevance. I do not accept the Applicant's submission that he did not appreciate the importance of statistics until after the decision was released. The Amnesty International memorandum, which contained statistics, was marked as an Exhibit during the Board's hearing. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Applicant received the Article from his parents at least six weeks before the Board delivered its decision. He had ample time to provide it to his counsel for submission to the Board prior to its decision. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Finally, I do not agree that the test for the introduction of new evidence in criminal appeals is relevant. ( 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 22 (Eng.); 106 D.L.R.(3d) 212; 50 C.C.C.(2d) 193; 17 C.R.(3d) 34 (Fr.)) There is no provision in the governing legislation or rules which provides for the introduction of fresh evidence on the merits on Judicial Review. This is not surprising, because it is clear from the powers of review set out in s. 18.1(4) of the Federal Court Act that judicial review is intended to address errors made during the Board's proceedings. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Article is only of marginal relevance in that it makes no reference to the treatment of Jehovahs' Witnesses. In addition, it was available and could have been submitted before the Board's decision. For these reasons the motion is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Motion dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: David Weir\ldl 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



