 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 1318)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Rennie, J.
November 13, 2012.
Counsel:
Jacqueline Swaisland, for the applicant;
Ildiko Erdei, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Lorne Waldman & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Rennie, J.
: The applicant seeks judicial review pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (
IRPA
) of the decision of Pre-Removal Risk Assessment (PRRA) officer (Officer), dated November 5, 2011, rejecting the applicant's PRRA application. For the reasons that follow the application is dismissed.
Background
[2]
The Officer's decision was based on the finding that the applicant would not be subject to risk of persecution, danger of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if returned to India.
[3]
The applicant, Jiauddin Jainul Shaikh, is a Muslim and a citizen of India. He is unmarried and his parents and siblings live in India.
[4]
The applicant testified before the Immigration and Refugee Board that in 2002, as a student activist, he joined with other Muslims to protest against politically affiliated Hindu fundamentalist groups such as Shiv Sena and Navriman Sena. Due to the applicant's involvement in Muslim activism, members of these fundamentalists groups began targeting him in 2005. The applicant unsuccessfully sought police protection from these incidents.
[5]
The applicant further said that on September 21, 2005, he was kidnapped and beaten. The leader of one of the Hindu fundamentalist groups contacted his father and demanded 100,000 rupees for his son's release. The applicant's father negotiated his son's release for 35,000 rupees on the condition that the balance would be paid within a week. The applicant was released with the warning that if the balance was not paid, he would have nowhere to hide in India. His father was unable to pay the balance. Thus, on November 16, 2005, he fled to the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The applicant worked in the UAE, but overstayed his tourist visa. He was subsequently caught by the authorities and deported back to India on May 11, 2007.
[6]
On his return to India the applicant initially lived with relatives and visited his home at night. However, on July 7, 2007, the extremists visited his home while he was there. The applicant said that he escaped through the back of the house. After consulting with his family he decided that India was not safe for him. He secured a six-month contract on a ship and a United States (US) visa and sailed to the US in October 2007. On May 14, 2008, when the ship docked in Vancouver, the applicant disembarked and entered Canada.
[7]
On arrival in Canada the applicant filed a claim for refugee protection. His refugee hearing was held in March 2010. In a decision dated July 27, 2010, the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) denied the applicant's refugee claim. The determinative issues were credibility and Internal Flight Alternative (IFA). The RPD identified various concerns that pointed to a lack of subjective fear of persecution and found that, on a balance of probabilities, the applicant had been country shopping. In addition, the RPD found that an IFA existed for the applicant in Kolkata, Delhi or Bangalore, where there were large Muslim populations. The RPD concluded that the applicant did not have a well founded fear of persecution and was not a person in need of protection. Leave to challenge the RPD's decision was denied.
[8]
On June 4, 2011 the applicant filed a PRRA application. In his PRRA the applicant explained that he feared persecution in India and irreparable harm should he return. He highlighted the continuing risk to his life in India, the lack of an IFA, the collusion between the police and religious extremist groups and referred to documentary sources on religious extremism and increasing violence against religious minorities. He also provided a letter from his father indicating that extremist groups had recently been searching for him and that his family was victim of a break-in by religious extremists on April 15, 2011.
Decision Under Review
[9]
The Officer noted the statutory requirement for new evidence mandated under subsection 113(a) of the
IRPA
, and the explanation of this assessment provided in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] FCJ No 1779. Turning to the applicant's PRRA submissions the Officer found that the applicant had merely restated the information provided to the RPD. Specifically, the Officer stated that:
This information is not significantly different than the information previously provided and I do not find the submission provides new evidence regarding the material elements of the applicant's personal circumstances.
[10]
The Officer noted the applicant's father's letter and its contents. After considering this letter the Officer found that the information contained therein was unverifiable and that its probative value was minimal. The Officer explained that:
The information does not come from a disinterested party to the outcome of the applicant's case and the information is not corroborated by independent evidence. I do not find this letter provides significantly different information from that considered by the RPD but rather is an update on the risk identified by the applicant. I do not find this letter rebuts the findings of the RPD including the IFA finding.
[11]
The Officer then turned to the articles submitted by the applicant, noting that he had read and considered them all. The Officer found that they reported on a number of topics, including "country conditions in India, reducing police torture against Muslims, the promotion of impunity in India and the façade of human rights in India". The Officer found that the articles were general in nature and did not address the material elements of the applicant's personal circumstances. He concluded that they did not rebut the RPD's findings and did not provide evidence of new risk developments that were personal to the applicant and that had arisen since the RPD's decision.
[12]
The Officer also addressed the applicant's submission that there was no IFA. With regards to these submissions the Officer stated that:
He [the applicant] quoted from various sources; however, he did not provide the documentation that he was quoting from and I can assign no weight to the sections quoted.
[13]
After reviewing the RPD's finding on IFA, the Officer found that none of the applicant's PRRA submissions rebutted this finding. Nevertheless, the Officer reviewed country conditions to determine if there had been a significant change in country conditions. Based on the human rights situation stated in the 2010 US Department of State Human Rights Report for India the Officer found that there had not been a significant change in country conditions since the RPD's decision.
[14]
The Officer concluded that the applicant did not face more than a mere possibility of persecution nor that it was more likely than not that he would be subjected to torture or was at risk to life or of cruel and unusual treatment of punishment upon return to India. The applicant's PRRA application was therefore rejected.
Issues and Standard of Review
[15]
The applicant raises three issues; first, whether the Officer erred in discounting the letter from the applicant's father on the basis that it was "unverifiable" and came from an interested party; whether the Officer erred in the assessment of country condition reports on the basis that the risks they described were not personalized to the applicant, and finally; whether the Officer erred in not according a hearing to the applicant.
[16]
It is well established that, barring an error in procedural fairness, the standard of review of a PRRA officer's decision is reasonableness. In consequence, it is not up to the reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome or to re-weigh the evidence.
Discussion
[17]
The respondent correctly notes that giving evidence little weight due to its provenance is an option which is open to the decision maker. The jurisprudence is clear that evidence should not be disbelieved simply because it comes from an interested party:
R v Laboucan
, 2010 SCC 12, [2010] 1 SCR 397, para 11. The Court has expressed this principle on several occasions; all neatly summarized by Justice de Montigny in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paras 24-25. Underlying these cases is the reality that certain types of evidence, by its very nature, will usually be known or testified to by persons with close personal connections to the applicant. This applies with particular force in cases of refugee protection, where the risk must be personal to the claimant. The Officer would thus have erred if this evidence had been wholly discounted on this basis alone.
[18]
The Officer also noted that the letter was not corroborated by independent evidence. In some respects, the Officer is right. There is no evidence that corroborates the precise events of April 5 when the applicant's parents' home was invaded by Hindu extremists. That is correct, but that aspect of the letter describes increasing aggressive conduct by Hindu extremists.
[19]
These errors in the treatment of the letter from the father must be situated in the context of the RPD decision and the PRRA process. The RPD found that the applicant had a viable IFA in other areas of India. The letter does not displace or address this finding.
[20]
At the outset, I note that a positive IFA finding is usually determinative of the claim:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  para 6. As explained by Justice Snider in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  para 7:
Whether the Applicant is correct in this assertion is not, in my view, important or necessary for this application.
The question of the existence of an IFA is a separate component of the Board's analysis that can stand alone
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). [...] [Emphasis added]
[21]
In sum, notwithstanding the errors, they do not affect the outcome of the decision or call into question the reasonableness of the IFA finding. The letter, even if accepted and given great weight, has no bearing on the IFA finding. In sum, although the Officer erred in his treatment of the evidence, the error was immaterial to the outcome of the case.
[22]
The applicant also contends that the Officer did not have regard to all of the evidence before him, rendering the decision unreasonable. To be specific, it is said that the Officer did consider the country condition reports. The applicant submitted a report: "The Promotion of Impunity in India: How Oppressive National Political Agendas Interact with the Global War on Terror" by Satchit Balsari, research associate at the Harvard School of Public Health (the"Balsari report").
[23]
The Officer dismissed this report stating:
[The Applicant] quoted from various sources; however, he did not provide the documentation that he was quoting from and I can assign to weight to the sections quoted.
[24]
The Officer continued, noting:
... the applicant submitted articles from various sources ... the articles report on various topics including country conditions in India, reducing police torture against Muslims, the promotion of impunity in India, and the façade of human rights in India.
[25]
The applicant has established that the Officer confused those aspects of the reports that were in fact "quoted" by the applicant as opposed to those that were relied on. This error is, in my view, equally immaterial. What is critical is whether the Officer fairly considered and directed his mind to their content.
[26]
The crux of the applicant's argument is that the Officer failed to examine the reports, because if he had, he would not have concluded that the assertion in the father's letter about a rise in Hindu extremism was uncorroborated.
[27]
The issue of Hindu extremism was not new; indeed, it was the very basis of the claim and was the very risk considered by the RPD. Nor did anything in that report address the viability of an IFA. To be specific, the report in question addresses violence in the state of Gujarat in 2002. The report itself was written in 2004. It is not new evidence that requires a hearing under section 113 of the
IRPA
. It is worth noting that the report, at page 20, sustains the reasonableness of the finding of the IFA:
Meanwhile, Indian minorities, like those persecuted in Germany, have started emigrating.
The vastness of Indian territory allows them to seek refuge within India's borders
. Ghettoization of Muslims has been observed across the country, with escalations in trend following communal violence. There are several regions in Gujarat that the VHP has declared"cleansed" - free of Muslims. Unprecedented migrations were seen in the city and suburbs of Bombay following the riots of 1993. These cloistered societies, however, foster insecurity, and the perceived lack of justice drives them to violent action. The area of Mumbra near Bombay, is not 80% Muslim, where "talk of nationalism, democracy, secularism ...has come to be seen as anti-Islam." [Emphasis added]
[28]
This leaves the question whether the Officer, given his treatment of the father's letter as "unverifiable", erred in not providing the applicant a hearing. Had the letter been directed to the viability of an IFA this argument might have succeeded. As it was directed to a known risk, already assessed, and for which refuge was available, it added nothing to the analysis of the risk before the Officer. The finding of the IFA was not called into question by this evidence.
JUDGMENT
[29]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application for judicial review be and is hereby dismissed. There is no question for certification.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeur sollicite, en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch 27 (la LIPR), le contrôle judiciaire de la décision d'un agent d'examen des risques avant renvoi (l'agent d'ERAR), datée du 5 novembre 2011, de rejeter sa demande d'ERAR. Pour les motifs qui suivent, la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
Contexte
[2]
La décision de l'agent d'ERAR était fondée sur sa conclusion selon laquelle le demandeur ne serait pas exposé au risque de persécution, au risque d'être soumis à la torture, à une menace pour sa vie ni au risque de subir des traitements ou peines cruels et inusités s'il était renvoyé en Inde.
[3]
Le demandeur, Jiauddin Jainul Shaikh, est musulman et citoyen indien. Il n'est pas marié et ses parents et sa fratrie vivent en Inde.
[4]
Le demandeur a déclaré devant la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié que, en 2002, alors étudiant activiste, il s'était joint à d'autres musulmans pour manifester contre des groupes fondamentalistes hindous affiliés à des groupes politiques, notamment le Shiv Sena et le Navriman Sena. En raison du rôle du demandeur dans l'activisme musulman, des membres de ces groupes fondamentalistes se sont mis à le cibler en 2005. Le demandeur a cherché, en vain, à obtenir la protection de la police relativement à ces incidents.
[5]
Le demandeur a dit aussi que, le 21 septembre 2005, il avait été enlevé et battu. Le chef de l'un des groupes fondamentalistes hindous en cause a communiqué avec le père du demandeur et a exigé 100 000 roupies pour la libération du demandeur. Le père du demandeur a négocié la libération de son fils en échange de 35 000 roupies, à condition que le solde de la rançon soit payé dans un délai d'une semaine. Le demandeur a été libéré, mais averti que, si le solde n'était pas payé, il n'aurait nulle part où se cacher en Inde. Son père n'a pas pu payer le reste de la rançon. Le 16 novembre 2005, le demandeur s'est donc enfui aux Émirats arabes unis (EAU). Il y a travaillé, mais a excédé la durée de son visa de touriste. Il a finalement été appréhendé par les autorités, puis renvoyé en Inde le 11 mai 2007.
[6]
De retour en Inde, le demandeur a d'abord vécu avec des proches et se rendait à son domicile la nuit. Cependant, le 7 juillet 2007, les extrémistes se sont rendus à son domicile alors qu'il s'y trouvait. Le demandeur a affirmé s'être échappé par l'arrière de la maison. Après avoir pris l'avis de sa famille, il a conclu qu'il n'était pas en sécurité en Inde. Il a obtenu un contrat de six mois pour travailler sur un navire, ainsi qu'un visa des États-Unis, puis il est parti pour les États-Unis en octobre 2007. Le 14 mai 2008, alors que le navire était à quai à Vancouver, le demandeur est descendu à terre et est entré au Canada.
[7]
À son arrivée au Canada, le demandeur a déposé une demande d'asile. L'audition de cette demande a eu lieu en mars 2010. Par une décision datée du 27 juillet 2010, la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR) a rejeté la demande d'asile. Les facteurs déterminants du rejet avaient trait à la crédibilité du demandeur et à l'existence d'une possibilité de refuge intérieur (PRI). La SPR a exprimé des doutes sur l'existence d'une crainte subjective de persécution et conclu que, selon la prépondérance de la preuve, le demandeur avait fixé son choix sur le pays le plus accommodant. Elle a aussi conclu que le demandeur disposait d'une PRI à Calcutta, Delhi ou Bangalore, qui comptent d'importantes populations musulmanes. Selon la SPR, le demandeur n'avait pas une crainte fondée de persécution et n'avait pas la qualité de personne à protéger. L'autorisation de contester la décision de la SPR a été refusée au demandeur.
[8]
Le 4 juin 2011, le demandeur a déposé une demande d'ERAR. Il y expliquait qu'il craignait d'être persécuté en Inde et de subir un préjudice irréparable s'il y était renvoyé. Le demandeur soulignait la persistance d'une menace pour sa vie en Inde, l'absence d'une PRI et la collusion entre la police et les groupes extrémistes religieux, et il mentionnait des sources documentaires portant sur l'extrémisme religieux et la violence grandissante à l'encontre des minorités religieuses. Il a aussi produit une lettre de son père indiquant que des groupes extrémistes s'étaient récemment mis à sa recherche et que sa famille avait été victime d'une introduction par effraction commise par des extrémistes religieux le 15 avril 2011.
La décision visée par le contrôle
[9]
L'agent d'ERAR a pris note de l'alinéa 113
a
) de la LIPR, qui oblige le demandeur à ne présenter que de nouveaux éléments de preuves, et il a tenu compte de l'analyse qui avait été faite de cette disposition dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] ACF n° 1779. S'agissant des observations figurant dans la demande d'ERAR, l'agent d'ERAR a estimé que le demandeur avait simplement repris les renseignements qu'il avait présentés à la SPR. Il écrivait plus précisément que:
[traduction]
Ces renseignements ne diffèrent pas vraiment des renseignements donnés précédemment, et je ne crois pas que la demande d'ERAR renferme des éléments de preuve nouveaux portant sur les éléments essentiels de la situation personnelle du demandeur.
[10]
L'agent d'ERAR a pris note de la lettre du père du demandeur, ainsi que de son contenu. Après examen de cette lettre, il a estimé que les renseignements qui y figuraient n'étaient pas vérifiables et que leur valeur probante était minime. Il a donné l'explication suivante:
[traduction]
Les renseignements ne viennent pas d'une partie désintéressée dans l'issue de l'affaire du demandeur et ils ne sont pas confirmés par une preuve indépendante. Je ne crois pas que cette lettre contient des renseignements nettement différents de ceux qu'a examinés la SPR, mais qu'il s'agit plutôt d'une mise à jour des risques allégués par le demandeur. Je ne crois pas que cette lettre réfute les conclusions de la SPR, notamment celles qui concernent l'existence d'une PRI.
[11]
L'agent d'ERAR est passé ensuite aux documents soumis par le demandeur, faisant observer qu'il les avait lus et étudiés dans leur totalité. Il a trouvé que les articles en question portaient sur une diversité de sujets, notamment [traduction] « la situation ayant cours en Inde, la réduction des tortures policières à l'encontre des musulmans, la progression de l'impunité en Inde et l'illusion du respect des droits de la personne en Inde ». Selon lui, les articles avaient une portée générale et ne concernaient pas les éléments essentiels de la situation personnelle du demandeur. L'agent a affirmé que ces articles ne réfutaient pas les conclusions de la SPR et n'apportaient pas la preuve de risques nouveaux propres au demandeur et postérieurs à la décision de la SPR.
[12]
L'agent d'ERAR a aussi examiné l'argument du demandeur selon lequel il n'existait aucune PRI. À ce propos, il s'est exprimé ainsi:
[traduction]
Il [le demandeur] a cité des passages provenant d'une diversité de sources; cependant, il n'a pas produit les documents dont proviennent ces citations, et je ne puis accorder aucune valeur aux passages cités.
[13]
Après avoir examiné la conclusion de la SPR sur la PRI, l'agent d'ERAR a conclu qu'aucune des observations figurant dans la demande d'ERAR ne réfutait cette conclusion. Il a néanmoins examiné les conditions ayant cours dans le pays pour savoir si elles avaient notablement évolué. Au vu de la situation des droits de la personne telle qu'elle était décrite dans le rapport de 2010 du Département d'État des États-Unis portant sur les droits de la personne en Inde, il a estimé que les conditions ayant cours dans le pays étaient demeurées sensiblement les mêmes depuis la décision de la SPR.
[14]
L'agent d'ERAR a conclu que le demandeur ne serait pas exposé à plus qu'une simple possibilité de persécution et qu'il ne serait vraisemblablement pas exposé à un risque de torture ou à une menace pour sa vie ou à des traitements ou peines cruels et inusités à son retour en Inde. La demande d'ERAR a donc été rejetée.
Questions en litige et norme de contrôle
[15]
Le demandeur soulève trois questions: d'abord, l'agent d'ERAR a-t-il commis une erreur en écartant la lettre du père du demandeur au motif qu'elle n'était [traduction] « pas vérifiable »et qu'elle venait d'une partie intéressée? Ensuite, l'agent d'ERAR a-t-il commis une erreur dans son évaluation des rapports sur les conditions dans le pays en affirmant que les risques dont ils faisaient état ne visaient pas le demandeur personnellement? Finalement, l'agent d'ERAR a-t-il commis une erreur en refusant d'accorder une audience au demandeur?
[16]
Il est bien établi que, hormis un manquement à l'équité procédurale, la norme de contrôle applicable à la décision d'un agent d'ERAR est celle de la décision raisonnable. Par conséquent, il n'appartient pas à la cour de révision d'imposer l'issue qu'elle juge préférable à celle choisie par l'agent, ni d'apprécier à nouveau la preuve.
Analyse
[17]
Le défendeur affirme, avec raison, que le décideur peut choisir d'accorder peu de poids à un élément de preuve en raison de sa provenance. Il ressort clairement de la jurisprudence qu'une preuve ne saurait être écartée du seul fait qu'elle vient d'une partie intéressée: voir l'arrêt
R c Laboucan
, 2010 CSC 12, [2010] 1 RCS 397, au paragraphe 11. La Cour fédérale a énoncé ce principe à plusieurs reprises, un principe qu'a très bien résumé le juge de Montigny dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 25. Ces précédents reposent sur le fait que certaines preuves, de par leur nature même, seront souvent connues ou présentées par des personnes ayant des liens personnels étroits avec le demandeur. Ce sera le cas tout particulièrement dans le traitement des demandes d'asile, où le risque doit viser le demandeur d'asile personnellement. L'agent d'ERAR aurait donc commis une erreur s'il avait écarté la lettre du père du demandeur sur ce seul fondement.
[18]
Toutefois, l'agent d'ERAR a aussi souligné que la lettre n'était pas confirmée par une preuve indépendante. À certains égards, il a raison. Aucune preuve ne confirme précisément l'incident du 5 avril, lors duquel des extrémistes hindous ont forcé le domicile des parents du demandeur. Cela est exact, mais ce volet de la lettre décrit l'agressivité croissante des extrémistes hindous.
[19]
Ces erreurs dans la manière dont l'agent d'ERAR a considéré la lettre du père doivent être placées dans le contexte de la décision de la SPR et dans celui du processus d'ERAR. La SPR a conclu que le demandeur disposait d'une PRI viable dans d'autres régions de l'Inde. La lettre n'infirme pas ni ne répond à cette conclusion.
[20]
Je note d'emblée que la conclusion à l'existence d'une PRI est habituellement déterminante quant à l'issue d'une demande d'asile:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Comme l'expliquait la juge Snider dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
Je suis d'avis qu'il n'est pas important ni nécessaire que je me prononce sur le bien-fondé de cette prétention du demandeur pour rendre une décision sur la présente demande.
La question de l'existence d'une PRI constitue un élément distinct de l'analyse de la Commission qui se suffit à lui-même
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.F. 1re inst.)). Pour dire les choses simplement,
lorsqu'il est constaté que le demandeur dispose d'une PRI, ce demandeur n'est pas un réfugié ni une personne àprotéger
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (C.A.F.)). [...] [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[21]
En somme, bien que l'agent ait commis des erreurs, elles ne modifient pas l'issue de la décision ni ne font douter que la conclusion d'existence d'une PRI soit raisonnable. Même si l'on acceptait la lettre et qu'on lui accordait beaucoup de poids, elle n'a aucun rapport avec la conclusion sur la PRI. Ainsi, bien que l'agent d'ERAR ait commis une erreur en analysant la preuve, cette erreur n'a aucunement influencé l'issue de l'affaire.
[22]
Le demandeur soutient aussi que l'agent d'ERAR n'a pas tenu compte de tous les éléments de preuve qui lui avaient été soumis, et que sa décision est donc déraisonnable. À la vérité, l'agent a bel et bien considéré les rapports sur la situation dans le pays. Le demandeur a produit un rapport intitulé
The Promotion of Impunity in India: How Oppressive National Political Agendas Interact with the Global War on Terror
(« La progression de l'impunité en Inde: comment des programmes politiques nationaux tyranniques interagissent avec la guerre planétaire contre la terreur »), rédigé par Satchit Balsari, attaché de recherche à la School of Public Health de l'Université Harvard (le rapport Balsari).
[23]
L'agent d'ERAR a écarté ce rapport dans les termes suivants:
[traduction]
Il [le demandeur] a cité des passages provenant d'une diversité de sources; cependant, il n'a pas produit les documents dont proviennent ces citations, et je ne puis accorder aucune valeur aux passages cités.
[24]
Puis il poursuivait ainsi:
[traduction]
[...] le demandeur a produit des articles provenant de diverses sources [...] les articles concernent divers sujets, notamment les conditions en Inde, la réduction des tortures policières à l'encontre des musulmans, la progression de l'impunité en Inde et l'illusion du respect des droits de la personne en Inde
[25]
Le demandeur a démontré que l'agent d'ERAR a confondu les aspects des rapports qui étaient en fait « cités » par le demandeur avec les aspects sur lesquels ce dernier s'appuyait. À mon avis, cette erreur est elle aussi sans conséquence. La question essentielle est de savoir si l'agent a suffisamment considéré et pesé le contenu de ces rapports.
[26]
Essentiellement, l'argument du demandeur consiste à dire que l'agent d'ERAR n'a pas examiné les rapports, parce que, s'il l'avait fait, il n'aurait pas conclu que le passage de la lettre du père faisant état d'une montée de l'extrémisme hindou n'était pas corroboré.
[27]
La question de l'extrémisme hindou n'était pas nouvelle; c'était d'ailleurs le fondement même de la demande d'asile, et c'était précisément le risque qu'avait examiné la SPR. Ce rapport ne disait rien non plus de la viabilité d'une PRI. En réalité, le rapport Balsari traite de la violence qui sévissait dans l'État du Gujerat en 2002. Le rapport a été rédigé en 2004. Il ne s'agit pas d'un élément de preuve nouveau justifiant la tenue d'une audience suivant l'article 113 de la LIPR. Il convient de noter que le rapport, à la page 20, étaye le caractère raisonnable de la conclusion de la SPR quant à l'existence d'une PRI:
[traduction]
Pendant ce temps, les minorités indiennes, comme celles qui ont été persécutées en Allemagne, ont commencé à émigrer.
L'immensité du territoire indien leur permet de trouver refuge à l'intérieur des frontières du pays
. La ghettoïsation des musulmans a été observée dans tout le pays, avec une tendance à la hausse correspondant aux violences intercommunautaires. Il y a plusieurs régions du Gujerat que le VHP a déclarées« nettoyées » - c'est-à-dire exemptes de musulmans. Des migrations sans précédent ont été observées dans la ville de Mumbai et ses banlieues à la suite des émeutes de 1993. Ces communautés recluses engendrent toutefois l'insécurité, et l'absence apparente de justice les pousse à des actions violentes. La région de Mumbra, près de Mumbai, n'est pas musulmane à 80 %, où « tout débat sur le nationalisme, la démocratie, la laïcité [...] en est venu à être considéré comme anti-islamique ». [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[28]
Il reste donc la question de savoir si l'agent d'ERAR, pour qui le contenu de la lettre du père était « non vérifiable », a commis une erreur en n'accordant pas d'audience au demandeur. Si la lettre avait porté sur la viabilité d'une PRI, cet argument aurait sans doute été recevable. Comme elle portait sur un risque connu et déjà évalué, un risque à l'égard duquel existait une possibilité de refuge intérieur, la lettre n'ajoutait rien à l'analyse du risque allégué devant l'agent. La conclusion d'existence d'une PRI n'a pas été minée par cette lettre.
JUGEMENT
[29]
LA COUR STATUE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]