[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an action for a declaration that the oil burner for furnaces manufactured and distributed in Canada by the plaintiff does not infringe the defendant's Canadian Letters Patent 1,148,048, and for a declaration that such Letters Patent are invalid and void. The plaintiff also seeks damages and an injunction with respect to allegedly false statements past and future respectively, made or to be made by the defendant with respect to infringement by the plaintiff of the defendant's patent. The defendant in a counter-claim seeks a declaration that the said patent is valid and that the plaintiff's oil burner infringes it. He seeks an injunction restraining the plaintiff from so infringing his patent, the delivery-up of any infringing apparatus, and damages for infringement.
FACTS
[2]
The defendant is a professional engineer who has practised as a civil engineer. He did not have any particular training in the area of home heating but became interested in the subject as a home-owner during the 1970's. In the winter of 1976-77 he discovered that when his furnace was off there was a considerable flow of the heated air from within his house into the air inlet of his oil burner. He concluded that this would cause a substantial heat, and thus energy, loss as a result of warm air going from the house, passing through the furnace and going up the chimney, which air would be replaced by the infiltration of cold air from outside the house. He set about to reduce this heat loss. After trying three devices or arrangements which did not work, he installed a flap or swinging door in an enclosure which he placed around his furnace. The flap was arranged in such a way that, when the furnace started running with its fan which sucks in air through the air inlet in order to enhance combustion, the low pressure created inside the enclosure would cause the flap to open inward so as to allow a flow of air into the enclosure and hence into the air inlet of the furnace. When the furnace stopped, the fan being stopped, the suction effect was discontinued with the result that the flap by virtue of gravity would hang straight down thus closing off the hole in the enclosure and preventing the flow of warm air from the house into the air inlet of the furnace. This device was first used during the winter of 1979-80 and it was only in the spring of 1980 that the defendant felt able to conclude, as a result of comparisons of fuel consumption that winter with the previous winter, that it was successfully reducing heat loss from his house. As I understand it, he has subsequently made similar comparisons in two other houses and has concluded through reduced fuel consumption that a substantial avoidance of heat loss has been achieved. He applied for his patent on February 18, 1981 and it was issued on June 14, 1983. The claims read as follows:
"1) An enclosure for use with an oil burner incorporating a fan to provide combustion air from within a residence, said burner having an air inlet, said enclosure comprising:
extension means sealingly engaging and surrounding said air inlet; and
a door means comprising a suitable barrier to free air access which minimises natural air flow in the absence of any combustion requirement, but permits free flow of combustion air when required, said door means being opened by air flow generated by the operation of said burner and being closed by gravity acting only on said door means when said oil burner is not operating.
"2) The enclosure of Claim 1 wherein said extension means further comprises a generally cylindrical body clampingly engaging said burner at one end thereof; and a cover plate located at the other end thereof; remote from said burner, said door means being located therein.
"3) The enclosure of Claims 1 and 2 wherein said door means is comprised of a flap having an upper edge, wherein said flap generally fills an aperture located in said cover plate, said flap being connected to said plate along or close to said upper edge thereby being closed by gravity.
"4) The enclosure of Claim 1 wherein said extension means is formed integrally with said burner."
The diagram with the patent shows a very simple device involving a door hinged at the top of a square hole, which it covers when the flap is at rest in a straight up and down position when the furnace is stopped. When the furnance is running the flap is drawn inward into the enclosure which surrounds the air inlet of the furnance, thus allowing the passage of air to the furnace.
[3]
The defendant has offered for sale a device called the "Warmswinger" which apparently works on the same principle but is of a design different from the one depicted in the patent. Nothing turns on the fact that the defendant marketed such a product and there was no evidence as to its commercial success.
[4]
The plaintiff's parent company, Riello Italy, has been in business since 1920 and during most of that period has manufactured oil burners. Since at least 1968 it has used a mechanism for opening and closing the air inlet on its furnaces which has involved oil being pumped, when the furnace commences to operate, into a small hydraulic jack which opens the air vent. When the furnace is turned off, a spring returns the air inlet mechanism to a closed position. In the late 1970's Riello Italy developed a new range of oil burners called the Mectron, all of which use an "air shutter" which is also opened by a small hydraulic jack and closed by a spring inside the jack which returns the piston to its original position and at the same time pulls shut the air-gate which is connected to the piston rod. The plaintiff company, Riello Canada, Inc., was formed in 1980. It assembles Mectron burners in Canada and distributes them in Canada and the United States. It has been selling this burner in Canada since early 1982. It has, since the started selling this burner, been distributing brochures such as Exhibit P-3 describing the characteristics of the Mectron burner. This brochure includes the following statement:
"AIR SHUTTER: closes automatically every time burner shuts down. This prevents cold air entering the combustion area during the burner off cycle insuring better starts and fuel savings. Eliminates the need for a separate stack damper."
On June 16, 1983, the defendant wrote to the plaintiff enclosing one of these brochures and asserting that certain features of the plaintiff's burners as described therein would infringe the defendant's patent. He referred in particular to the "described air shutter". The letter made a "cease and desist" demand. After some interim correspondence and phone calls, a letter was sent by the plaintiff's solicitors on July 19, 1983, to the defendant denying infringement, alleging invalidity of his patent, and warning him not to interfere with the plaintiff's clients. On July 21, 1983, the defendant's solicitors wrote to the plaintiff warning it to cease infringing his patent. On September 16, 1983, the defendant himself wrote a letter to the President of the plaintiff threatening the possibility of legal proceedings against the plaintiff's customers. On September 29, 1983, two of the dealers in Montreal selling Mectron burners, Les Pétroles Motoco Inc., and Kalil Pétroles Inc., received a registered letter from the defendant advising them that the Riello burners infringed on his patent and demanding of them $800 representing reasonable royalties on their Riello sales in Québec for the month of September. He warned that if he did not receive payment he would proceed against them in small claims court. He proceeded to bring an action in the Provincial Court of Québec, Small Claims Division, on October 5, 1983. In the meantime, the plaintiff commenced this action on September 30, 1983.
ISSUES
[5]
Simply put, the defendant does not assert that his patented device is mechanically novel as it is at best no more than a variation of devices used for many years in connection with furnaces. Nor, as I understand it, does he assert that his patented device is applied to oil furnaces in an essentially novel way (or, if he does, he cannot do so for reasons which I shall demonstrate below). Instead, he asserts, or can only assert, that the patentable novelty lies in the advantage - in his view, heretofore unrecognized - that warm air from within the house is thereby prevented from escaping through the furnace and up the chimney during the off-cycle, which escape of warm air causes the infiltration of cold air from outside and thus increases heating requirements. He says in effect that heretofore the only advantage recognized in the automatic closure of the furnace air inlet during the off-cycle was the avoidance of unnecessary cooling of the furnace and heat exchanger, which cooling would reduce efficiency by requiring extra fuel consumption to restore that lost heat at the beginning of the next on-cycle. He says that the plaintiff, by publication in connection with its Mectron burner of the brochure quoted above, where it claims that the Mectron "eliminates the need for separate stack damper" is asserting an advantage for the "air-gate" or "air shutter" of the Mectron, namely the prevention of heat loss up the chimney, which falls within the advantages of the defendant's device as described in the patent. This is said to follow because a "stack damper" is normally used to prevent such flow of warm air up the chimney, which flow can instead be avoided by the use of a device such as the defendant's or the plaintiff's at the air inlet side of the furnace. In my view the only serious issue in this case is as to whether the defendant has properly and effectively claimed such an advantage, and if so whether such advantage is entitled to patent protection. The other issues can be disposed of somewhat summarily.
INFRINGEMENT
[6]
I am satisfied that the plaintiff's oil burner in question does not infringe the defendant's patent.
[7]
In coming to this conclusion I am relying solely on the language of the claims of patent 1,148,048 as quoted above. Section 36(2) of the Patent Act makes it clear that the claims must state distinctly
"... the things or combinations that the applicant regards as new and in which he claims an exclusive property or privilege."
That is, the applicant for a patent must describe in his claims precisely what it is over which he claims a monopoly. In this case the claims say nothing "distinctly and in explicit terms", as required by section 36(2), concerning the alleged advantage of reducing cold air infiltration. The only words coming close to doing so are those of the third paragraph of claim 1 which refer to "a door ... which minimizes natural air flow ...". These words do not by themselves assert a monopoly over any air inlet closing device which has the particular effect of reducing cold air infiltration. The words are clear and unambiguous in the sense that they speak of natural air flow, a concept which is readily understood. That this natural air flow may have other deleterious consequences is not mentioned. There is no ambiguity which would justify me in looking at the disclosures for further illumination as to what is meant by "natural air flow". The role of the claims and the need for them to state the monopoly asserted was well expressed by Lord Russell of Killowen in Electric &  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), at 39:
"The function of the claims is to define clearly and with precision the monopoly claimed, so that others may know the exact boundaries of the area within which they will be trespassers. Their primary object is to limit and not to extend the monopoly. What is not claimed is disclaimed. The claims must undoubtedly be read as part of the entire document, and not as a separate document; but the forbidden field must be found in the language of the claims and not elsewhere. It is not permissible, in my opinion, by reference to some language used in the earlier part of the specification to change a claim which by its own language is a claim for one subject-matter into a claim for another and a different subject-matter, which is what you do when you alter the boundaries of the forbidden territory. A patentee who describes an invention in the body of a specification obtains no monopoly unless it is claimed in the claims. As Lord Cairns said, there is no such thing as infringement of the equity of a patent."
The Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1 cited this case with approval and at page 11 C.P.R. Urie, J., after reviewing several cases on the interpretation of claims stated:
"In summary, the principles which I derive from the above-mentioned authorities as well as from others referred to in argument, to which further reference need not be made here, are that in construing the claims in patent recourse to the remainder of the specification is (a) permissible only to assist in understanding terms used in the claims; (b) unnecessary where the words of the claim are plain and unambiguous; and (c) improper to vary the scope or ambit of the claims ..."
In my view the words of these claims are clear and unambiguous and I must therefore rely solely on them to determine the scope of the defendant's monopoly.
[8]
That claimed monopoly says nothing as to a purpose of reducing cold air infiltration. Leaving aside for the moment the question of whether such a claim could be made, it will suffice to look at the physical characteristics of the plaintiff's oil burner to see if it infringes the defendant's patent. I need look no further than the requirement of claim 1 as to the
"... said door means being opened by air flow generated by the operation of said burner and being closed by gravity. ..."
The plaintiff's oil burner has neither of these characteristics. Clearly the air-gate of air shutter of the plaintiff's burner is opened by the pumping of oil into a hydraulic jack, not by air flow. Further, the plaintiff's air shutter is closed by pressure from the spring and is in no way closed by gravity, despite the elaborate and rather far-fetched efforts of the defendant and his counsel to demonstrate that it is. It may be true that if the air shutter were disconnected from the piston rod of the hydraulic jack it would, in the normal orientation of a Mectron burner, descend by force of gravity (although, without more, it would probably descend too far and leave the air inlet wholly or partly uncovered). Nevertheless, that is not the way the machine works or is intended to work. Clearly, it is the control exerted by the piston rod connected to the air shutter which governs its movements. This is further demonstrated by the evidence that the Mectron burner can be installed at various angles - including those in which gravity would work to keep the shutter open rather than closed - and still function properly.
[9]
The other claims are all dependent on claim 1. I need go no further than this, then, in distinguishing the plaintiff's oil burner from the claims of the defendant's patent and in holding that the patent has not been infringed by the plaintiff.
VALIDITY OF PATENT 1,148,048
[10]
The validity of this patent has been attacked on numberous grounds. The following will adequately demonstrate why I think the patent to be invalid.
[11]
(a) Obviousness - There is ample material in the prior art upon which I can conclude that a skilled but unimaginative workman would, in February, 1981, have been led without difficulty to design a device such as that covered by the patent and indeed to use it for the special purpose (reducing cold air infiltration) which the defendant says forms part of his patent.
[12]
U.S. patent 2,370,891 (Thornquist), issued March 6, 1945 clearly depicts a draft control device mounted prior to the air inlet on an oil burner. This device includes a "butterfly valve" which is a somewhat more sophisticated device than the one depicted in the defendant's patent but which operates in exactly the same way: it is opened by the reduction in pressure caused by the starting of the oil burner fan and it swings closed, obviously by gravity, when the fan stops. Further the disclosures at lines 17-19 on page 1 signal the problem of warm air loss through an open air inlet on an oil burner. It states that
"The air flowing through the furnace merely rises up through the chimney and is wasted."
A skilled workman reading this would surely have understood that the closing of the air inlet would prevent both the cooling of the furnace and the general loss of warm air up the chimney.
[13]
U.S. patent 2,937,697 (Johnston), issued May 24, 1960, also reveals most if not all of the elements of the defendant's patent. It too involves a draft control mounted prior to the air intake on an oil burner. When the oil burner starts the damper is allowed to swing open and when the oil burner stops the damper is closed. Admittedly it is not clear as to whether the damper is pulled open by air pressure or closed solely by gravity, since there is a solenoid which, although not connected to the damper, holds it shut when the solenoid is extended and allows it to be open when the solenoid is retracted. It certainly teaches the desirability of an air intake damper and in particular it teaches the very advantage which the defendant asserts to be the essence of his invention. In column 1, lines 30-32, after referring to air flow through an open air inlet of a furnace in off-cycle, it says that:
"The air lost in this manner is replaced by cold air coming from outside to inside which further acts to lower inside temperature."
This is the very phenomenon which the defendant says he discovered in 1976 or 1977! I might add that under cross-examination concerning the Johnston patent, the defendant said that it was not adequate prior art because it did not teach that a pre-inlet air shutter would be ineffective to cut off heat loss up the chimney unless the draft regulator on the chimney side of the furnace was shut. Yet I can find no mention of this requirement in the defendant's own patent, either in the disclosures or the claims. It cannot be an essential part of his invention.
[14]
U.S. patent 2,011,754 (Cornelius), issued August 20, 1935, also displays a draft control mechanism mounted on the air intake system of a furnace. In this case the mechanism consists of two hinged louvers rather than one flap but the principle is exactly the same: the louvers are opened by the drop in air pressure when the fan is running and closed by gravity when the fan stops.
[15]
The only other piece of published prior art which I think sufficiently relevant to mention is the brochure for the Johnson "Bankheat" oil burners. It was agreed by the parties that this brochure was published first in 1968. While not describing in detail the Johnson air control mechanism, the brochure explains that the Bankheat burner has a "counter-balanced shutter" that admits air to the furnace, a shutter which is held open by suction and which closes itself when the burner stops. This obviously describes a shutter which is opened by the drop in air pressure caused by the fan and closed by gravity. This shutter is formed integrally with the oil burner and is not retrofitted.
[16]
Apart from these publications, evidence given at the trial by the plaintiff's witnesses confirmed that pre-inlet air gates, including suction and gravity operated devices, were well known in the oil burner business prior to 1978.
[17]
I am satisfied that the above prior art would have been sufficient to lead a skilled but unimaginative workman to the mechanical devices described in claims 1 to 4 of the patent.
[18]
Even if the particular advantage perceived by the defendant for his invention must be considered part of it, a proposition which I have rejected above, I believe certain of the prior art adequately signalled this advantage of an air inlet control for an oil burner. As quoted above, the Thornquist patent adverts to this problem and the Johnston patent more precisely describes the problem of infiltration of cold air resulting from the loss of warm air up the chimney during the off-cycle of the furnace. Further, the evidence supports the view that cold air infiltration had been known of as a phenomenon for many years. Mr. Harry West, an expert witness called by the plaintiff who has no business connection with either of the parties and whose evidence I generally except, has been involved in the oil heating field since 1959. He said that he had learned of the air infiltration problem in a course in 1962. He further testified that there has been considerable disagreement and change of opinion during the part decade or more as to how significant a problem air infiltration is. For example, he said that in some houses the more serious problem is to ensure adequate infiltration to support furnace combustion. He said that more heated air from the house is lost (hence more infiltration occurs) during the on-cycle of the furnace rather than during the off-cycle to which the defendant's device is directed. He also demonstrated that many oil burners are designed to reduce air flow through them during the off-cycle even without an air intake shutter. Against this evidence I have that of the defendant himself who seems to have been surprised to learn in 1976-77 that he was losing heat up his chimney through the furnace when the latter was in its off-cycle. His proposition is that while it was generally known that air from within the house would enter the furnace during the off-cycle with the effect of cooling the burner and the heat exchanger, it was not known that such air might continue on up the chimney. I find this very difficult to believe and in this respect I accept the evidence of Mr. West that this was a known phenomenon whose importance was, and is, somewhat debatable.
[19]
In further support of its pleading that there was no invention because of obviousness, the plaintiff argued in effect that even if a new advantage were discovered and properly claimed - propositions which I have already rejected - such discovery does not amount to a new invention.
[20]
By section 28 of the Patent Act it is only an "invention" which can be patented and by section 2 of that Act the word "invention" is defined to mean:
"any new and useful art, process, machine, manufacture or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement in any art, process, machine, manufacture or composition of matter;"
The identification of an additional advantage to a mechanical device - an advantage which has always existed but which was theretofore unperceived - does not, in my view, constitute any new "art", nor "process", nor "machine", nor "manufacture of composition of matter", nor any "new and useful improvement" in any of the foregoing. It seems to me that, at best, it is a "discovery".
[21]
The classic distinction between a "discovery" and an "invention" may be found in the judgment of Buckley, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ch. D.). In that case the patentee had claimed only for an article made of commonly available materials. It involved a strip of canvass with a piece of india rubber attached to it, to be used for wrapping around damaged tires in order to make a repair. At 126 Buckley, J., said:
"... Discovery adds to the amount of human knowledge, but it does so only by lifting the veil and disclosing something which before had been unseen or dimly seen. Invention also adds to human knowledge, but not merely by disclosing something. Invention necessarily involves also the suggestion of an act to be done, and it must be an act which results in a new product, or a new result, or a new process, or a new combination for producing an old product or an old result."
Applying this test to the present case, there is nothing in the nature of an invention because there is no new product, no new result, no new process, nor any new combination for producing an old product or an old result. There is simply an old product. Its use in the same manner produces no "new result" but merely the same result as before, the albeit that the defendant alleges that part of the result was previously unknown. What the defendant has contributed, if anything, is an idea - the idea that if a homeowner uses a device which is already well known and available he will realize more benefits than he would previously have expected. At page 127 of the Reynolds case Buckley, J., states:
"... Now the idea that leads to an invention is, in my opinion, no part of the invention. The idea, or the recognition of the want, stimulates the inventor to do something else. It is the something further which he does which is the invention. The mere idea, or the conception that it is very desirable to have a patch, such as that you can put it on when you have not got the materials in the workship is not patentable. What is patentable is a new way of doing that thing, either by way of a new article to be used, or a new method of putting it on, or some combination which would be capable of being patented. I cannot find that there is anything of that sort here."
Similarly, I cannot find anything capable of being patented in the present case.
[22]
I believe this conclusion is supported by the jurisprudence. In Re an Application by Louis Renault (1924), 41 R.P.C. 649, the Solicitor General held at page 650:
"... To say that, when the whole essence of the invention has already been discovered, the applicant may succeed, because he has discovered certain additional advantages in what some former inventor has done, does not seem to me to be justified by the language of section 11(1)(b)."
The paragraph referred to is part of the Patents and Designs Act, 1907 and 1919 (U.K.) and sets out the ground of prior publication of the same invention as basis for opposition to the grant of a patent for the invention.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the invention claimed in the patent was a product derived from soya beans. This product was discovered by accident in the course of other experiments and it was found to have qualities as a bleaching agent. There the patent was upheld, but it is clear that the court found there was not merely a discovery of this bleaching agent but also the development of means for extracting it from the soya beans, preparing it for effective use, and preserving it. The patent which was upheld therefor involved more than the mere discovery of an unexpected benefit which could be derived from a commonly known article, the soya bean.
[23]
Counsel for the defendant cited in support of its patent several cases. The most important was that of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1 (S.C.C.). In this case the proposed patent claimed the use of old, well known chemical compounds but for a new purpose as plant growth regulators. According to the patent application these compounds could be used to promote selectively the growth of plants such as by acceleration of flowering, stimulation of seed germination, increased formation of roots, etc. To achieve these results it was necessary to mix the compounds with an adjuvant and apply them to the plants in a particular way. Wilson, J., writing for the court said at page 11:
"... This is a case where the inventive ingenuity is in the discovery of the new use and no further inventive step is required in the application of the compounds to that use, i.e., in the preparation of the appropriate compositions."
In my view that case is distinguishable from the present one because it involved applying known substances in a different way. It is true that there is a similarity in that new and previously unknown advantages were discovered with respect to familiar compounds, just as the defendant alleges he found a previously undiscovered advantage to the familiar pre-inlet draft control mechanism. But his alleged discovery led only to the use of the same device in the same manner. The discovery in the Shell Oil Co. case led to the use of known compounds in a different way; that is, by selective application to plants. Counsel for the defendant also cited a recent decision of the Patent Appeal Board, Re Application for Patent of Frederick (1982), 1 C.P.R.(3d) 361. There the patent sought related to the use of a two-speed pump in a swimming pool filtering system. The patent examiner had rejected the application on the ground that the applicant had merely taken a prior art system and suggested the use instead of a two-speed pump which was also a familiar article. The Patent Appeal Board allowed the registration on the ground that though the individual elements of the system were old combination of a filtering system with a two-speed pump was new. Again, this case is distinguishable from the present case because the defendant in his patent does not show any new combination of existing devices: he shows only a known application of known devices. Other cases cited by the defendant in this respect did not appear to me to be directly relevant.
[24]
(b) Anticipation - While recognizing the different criteria for anticipation as compared to obviousness, I am satisfied that the Thornquist patent also meets all the requirements for anticipation by prior publication. It includes all of the essential elements of the defendant's patent, particularly claim 1 thereof. Claims 2, 3 and 4 of his patent are dependent on claim 1 and reveal only minor variations which do not by themselves display any invention.
[25]
I am not prepared to find that there was anticipation by use. Such anticipation was only properly pleaded in respect of alleged use by the plaintiff through the manufacture and distribution of its Mectron burners. I have held earlier that the Mectron burner did not infringe the defendant's patent and for the same reasons it could not have anticipated the defendant's patent.
[26]
There is also an allegation in the pleadings that the defendant's patent was in public use more than two years prior to his application for the patent, but there was little or no evidence to support such an allegation and I dismiss it.
[27]
(c) Non-Patentability as "scientific principle" - I am also inclined to think that the defendant's patent is precluded by subsection 28(3) of the Patent Act which provides that:
(3) No patent shall issue ... for any mere scientific principle or abstract theorem.
The defendant says that the problem of cold air infiltration was not perceived until the 1970's and that the real novelty of his invention was to teach that the prevention of loss of interior air through a furnace and chimney during the off-cycle would reduce the amount of cold air which would otherwise have to be drawn into the house to replace the heated air lost up the chimney. If this were truly a novel proposition, it seems to me it is only the statement of what might be regarded as a "scientific principle" or principles. Put simply, the principles are that (a) air will move to an area of lower pressure, hence heated air will move into and up an unheated chimney and (b) natural forces of gravity will cause cold exterior air to be forced into the house, through any available apertures, to replace the interior air which has flowed up the chimney. These propositions must be in the nature of "scientific principles" as contemplated by subsection 28(3). If they represent the novelty in the defendant's patent, then it is not patentable.
[28]
(d) Compliance with section 36 - The plaintiff alleged non compliance with section 36 of the Patent Act on various other grounds. In the circumstances I find it unnecessary to deal with these allegations.
FALSE STATEMENTS
[29]
The plaintiff asks for damages in respect of statements made by the defendant to the plaintiff's customers and for an injunction preventing further such statements. These claims are based on paragraph 7(a) and section 53 of the Trade Marks Act which provide as follows:
"7. No person shall
(a) make a false or misleading statement tending to discredit the business, wares or services of a competitor;
"53. Where it is made to appear to a court of competent jurisdiction that any act has been done contrary to this Act, the court may make any such order as the circumstances require including provision for relief by way of injunction and the recovery of damages or profits, and may give directions with respect to the disposition of any offending wares, packages, labels and advertising material and of any dies used in connection therewith."
[30]
It is clear that notwithstanding the receipt by him of unequivocal statements from the plaintiff as to its position that its patent did not infringe the defendant's, the defendant did make statements in his letter of September 26, 1983 (see Exhibit P-13) to at least two of the plaintiff's customers, i.e., Les Pétroles Motico Inc. and Kalil Pétroles Inc. which clearly stated to these distributors that the plaintiff's burners infringed the defendant's patent and that they would be obliged to pay reasonable royalties to the defendant in respect of any sales of Riello burners. The defendant has admitted that such a letter was sent. Having regard to the foregoing, it is clear that those statements were false or misleading as required by paragraph 7(a) of the Trade Marks Act. While I believe it would be possible to say that the defendant had no reasonable grounds for believing these statements to be true, it was in any event held by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 202-03 that it is not necessary for the plaintiff in an action under this paragraph to prove mala fides or the lack of a reasonable belief on the part of the defendant.
[31]
Nor do I have any difficulty in finding that these statements made by the defendant would tend to discredit the business and wares of the plaintiff. They would not only indicate to the customers of the plaintiff that its product had been wrongly produced in violation of the defendant's rights, but also that anyone dealing in the plaintiff's products would be subject to demands for the payment of royalties to a third party, the defendant.
[32]
To establish liability for damages, of course, it is (as noted in the S. & S. case, supra at page 197) necessary to prove some loss resulting from the wrongful act. As the question of proof of damages in this case has been left for determination on a reference, I have no basis upon which I could decide at this point that damages had occurred. This therefore represents a finding that the defendant has made false or misleading statements within the meaning of paragraph 7(a) of the Trade Marks Act and if, on a reference, actual loss by the plaintiff is proven, then such loss must be compensated by the defendant in the form of damages payable pursuant to section 53 of that Act.
[33]
The plaintiff has also asked for punitive and exemplary damages but no basis has been shown to me for such awards. A claim based on the Statute of Monopolies (1623) was not argued.
[34]
It is not necessary to prove loss to obtain an injunction under section 53, however, and on the basis of the defendant's past acts contrary to paragraph 7(a) of the Trade Marks Act, I will enjoin him from further such acts.
[35]
It was pleaded by the defendant, though not argued, that paragraph 7(a) of the Trade Marks Act is ultra vires of the Parliament of Canada and that therefore this court has no jurisdiction to grant any relief based on this paragraph. Such challenges to section 7 of the Trade Marks Act are, of course, inspired by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the court held paragraph 7(e) of that Act to be invalid in the context of the facts of that case. It must be noted, however, that Laskin, C.J.C., writing for the majority of the court quotes approvingly from the judgment of that court in the S. & S. case, supra where paragraph 7(a) was applied in essentially the same circumstances as are involved in the present case, namely in connection with a claim for damages resulting from the threat of legal proceedings made by a party alleging infringement of a patent, which patent was held invalid in the action in question. At page 22 C.P.R. the Chief Justice distinguishes the application of various paragraphs of section 7 "to support existing regulation by the Parliament of Canada in the fields of patents, trademarks, trade names and copyright ..." from the case then before the court. At page 34 he states:
"... Section 7 is, however, nourished for federal legislative purposes in so far as it may be said to round out regulatory schemes prescribed by Parliament in the exercise of its legislative power in relation to patents, copyrights, trademarks and trade names. The subparagraphs of s. 7, if limited in this way, would be sustainable ..."
Parliament's exclusive jurisdiction over patents is not disputed. Paragraph 7(a) of the Trade Marks Act, when applied in a situation such as the present, precludes a registered patentee from making untrue statements as to the scope of his patent to the detriment of others. In other words, it seeks to prevent the abuse of rights conferred by federal law, and this is surely a legitimate exercise of the federal legislative authority just as the Federal Court Act provides means for curbing the abuse by federal agencies and officials of powers conferred by federal law. That a provision of this kind was perceived as part of patent law in the 19th century, not long after our constitution was originally framed, may be seen in section 32 of the Patents, Designs, and Trade Marks Act, 1883 (U.K.), 46 & 47 Vict. c. 57, which provided:
"32. Where any person claiming to be the patentee of an invention, by circulars advertisements of otherwise threatens any other person with any legal proceedings or liability in respect of any alleged manufacture use sale or purchase of the invention, any person or persons aggrieved thereby may bring an action against him, and may obtain an injunction against the continuance of such threats, and may recover such damage (if any) as may have been sustained thereby, if the alleged manufacture, use, sale, or purchase to which the threats related was not in fact an infringement of any legal rights of the person making such threats: Provided that this section shall not apply if the person making such threats with due diligence commences and prosecutes an action for infringement of his patent."
[36]
While the plaintiff referred also to paragraph 7(e) in its pleadings I think nothing is added by that paragraph in the present circumstances and I therefore find it unnecessary to consider it.
COSTS
[37]
The plaintiff being successful on all issues, it is entitled to costs except in respect of the first day of trial which I have made the subject of an earlier order.
Action allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]