[1]
Heald, D.J.
: This appeal, pursuant to s. 56(1) of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (the "
Act
"), is from a decision of the Trademarks Opposition Board (the "Registrar") rejecting the Appellant's ("Molson") application for registration of the trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design", for use in association with brewed alcoholic beverages.
I. Facts
[2]
The series of events relevant to this appeal cover a 28 year period, commencing in 1968. Fortunately, Molson's counsel provided the court with a useful summary of these events in chronological order.
i. The Relevant Trademarks
Molson's Trademark "Club"
[3]
On
April 25, 1968
, Formosa Spring Brewery ("Formosa"), Molson's predecessor-in-title, filed an application for the trademark "Club". Registration for this trademark (No. 160,974) was ultimately obtained by Molson on
January 31, 1969
.
Molson's Trademark "Club Ale & Design"
[4]
On
May 1, 1968
, Formosa commenced use of the "Club Ale & Design" trademark, as illustrated below.
[see printed version]
"Club Ale & Design" (Reg. No. 421,749)
On
July 16, 1968
, Formosa filed Application No. 314,762 for the "Club Ale & Design" trademark. Lengthy opposition proceedings brought by Labatt ensued in respect of the registration of this trademark (Transcripts of proceedings of April 10, 1996 at p. 10). Finally, on
January 7, 1994
, Molson obtained registration of this trademark, which was assigned Registration No. 421,749.
Molson's Trademark "Molson Club"
[5]
On
March 23, 1976
, Molson filed an application for registration of the trademark "Molson Club". Molson obtained registration of this mark on
May 20, 1994
, which was assigned Registration No. 427,357.
Molson's Trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design"
[6]
On
November 17, 1975
, Molson filed Application No. 391,643 for registration of the trademark, at issue in these proceedings, namely, "Molson Club Ale & Design", as illustrated below.
[see printed version]
"Molson Club Ale & Design" (App. No.
391,643)
On
January 30, 1985
, this application was advertised in accordance with the
Act
. On
October 15, 1985
, Labatt filed a Statement of Opposition with the Registrar opposing the registration of "Molson Club Ale & Design". Finally, on
January 31, 1995
, the Registrar decided in favour of Labatt and refused to register the trademark. It is that decision which is the subject of this appeal.
Labatt's Trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design"
[7]
On
December 15, 1971
, Kiewel-Pelissier Breweries Ltd. ("Kiewel-Pelissier"), Labatt's predecessor-in-title, filed an application for registration of the trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design", as illustrated below.
[see printed version]
"Manitoba's Club & Design"
On
January 2, 1985
, that trademark was advertised for opposition purposes in accordance with the
Act
. Molson filed a Statement of Opposition with the Registrar, opposing registration of the trademark, on
January 14, 1985
, on the basis it was confusing with several of Molson's trademarks, including "Club Ale & Design". On
November 5, 1987
, Labatt's application for this trademark was withdrawn without prejudice. Consequently, on
November 30, 1987
, the Trademarks Office declared this application to be abandoned.
ii. Labatt's Opposition To Molson's "Molson Club Ale & Design"
[8]
On October 15, 1985, Labatt filed a Statement of Opposition, which opposed the registration of Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" on the following three grounds:
1. That Molson is not the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3)(b) of the
Act
because, as of the applicant's filing date, the applied for trademark was confusing with the trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design", for which an application had been previously filed on December 15, 1971 by the opponent.
2. That Molson is not the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3)(a) of the
Act
because, as of the applicant's filing date, the applied for trademark was confusing with a series of trademarks including the word "Club" and/or the representation of a playing card club symbol, previously used in Canada by the opponent.
3. That in view of the foregoing, the applied for trademark is not distinctive (Opposition Evidence, Volume 1 at tab 2).
[9]
Molson filed and served a Counter Statement to Opposition. Labatt filed affidavits with the Registrar for the purpose of the opposition proceedings. These affidavits were sworn by the following persons: Bernard Beasley (2); Holly Huard; James Johnston; Kimberley Gillis; David Poole; Reuben Abecassis; Julius Moroz; and Don Kunderman. In addition, Labatt filed a certified copy of its trademark Application No. 348,727 as well as transcripts of the cross-examination on affidavit of Messrs. Beasley, Poole, Abecassis, Moroz and Kunderman. Molson did not file any evidence in respect of the opposition. Both parties filed written arguments and were represented at an oral hearing.
[10]
With respect to the first ground of opposition, the Registrar determined that Molson had failed to satisfy the onus on it to show that its applied for mark was not confusing with Labatt's applied for mark, "Manitoba's Club & Design". Accordingly, the Registrar held in favour of Labatt in respect of the first ground of opposition.
[11]
The Registrar then stated that the remaining grounds need not be considered, in view of his finding with respect to confusion. However, he proceeded to note that the success of the second ground, that Molson was not entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3)(a), was open to doubt. He did not reach a conclusion on this ground. With respect to the third ground, he expressed the view that the applied for mark was not distinctive, based on the evidence before him.
[12]
It seems clear from the record, that the Registrar did not make a decision with respect to Molson's second ground of opposition. On this basis, Labatt suggested, at the hearing, that if the court were inclined to allow the appeal, that the matter should be sent back to the Registrar for a determination of the second ground of opposition, namely that Molson was not entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3)(a) because, as of Molson's date of application, the applied for trademark was confusing with a series of trademarks, including the word "Club" and/or the representation of a playing card club symbol, previously used in Canada by Labatt.
[13]
As is permitted by s. 56(5) of the
Act
, the parties adduced additional evidence on this appeal, which was not before the Registrar. Molson filed affidavits sworn by Barry Heisz and Christine Hasbani. Labatt filed affidavits sworn by Bernard Beasley (May 29, 1995) and P. Claire Gordon.
II. Issues
[14]
The following issues arose in relation to this appeal:
i. What is the role of the court on appeal?
ii. Did the Registrar err in refusing to register Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design", on the basis it was confusing with Labatt's applied for trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design"?
iii. Did the Registrar err in determining that Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" was not distinctive?
III. Analysis
i. What Is The Role Of The Court On Appeal?
[15]
This appeal from the decision of the Registrar is brought pursuant to s. 56 of the
Act
, which reads, in part, as follows:
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months.
. . . . .
"(5) On an appeal under section (1), evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar."
[16]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  held that in respect of an appeal under s. 56, this court should give great weight to the conclusion of the Registrar, due to his/her experience, however, the court is not precluded from substituting its own conclusion in an appropriate case. Justice Ritchie stated the following at p. 200:
"In my view the Registrar's decision on the question of whether or not a trade mark is confusing should be given great weight and the conclusion of an official whose daily task involves the reaching of conclusions on this and kindred matters under the
Act
should not be set aside lightly but, as was said by Mr. Justice Thorson, then President of the Exchequer Court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision that two marks are confusingly similar must not go to the extent of relieving the judge hearing an appeal from the Registrar's decision of the responsibility of determining the issue with due regard to the circumstances of the case.'
"I am accordingly of the opinion that it was open to Mr. Justice Jackett in the circumstances of this case to substitute his conclusion for that of the Registrar and I do not think that he was precluded from doing so by the decision of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  before the Registrar, the courts have accorded reduced deference to the decision of the Registrar, and have characterized the appeal proceeding as a trial de novo. In the case at bar, the parties are relying on additional evidence that was not before the Registrar. The role of this court, in such circumstances, was described by Justice Rouleau of the Federal Court, Trial Division, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 205 (T.D.), at pp. 208-209 (C.P.R.):
"At the outset I should note that this court has consistently said that a decision of the Registrar as to whether two marks are confusing is to be given great weight and not to be lightly set aside:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . However, where the court has the benefit of considering evidence not before the Registrar, the discretion of the court will be totally unfettered by the previous decision of the Registrar and, in essence, the appeal functions as a trial de novo:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 32 F.T.R. 274; 19 A.C.W.S.(3d) 911 (T.D.). In this regard the appellant introduced new evidence in the form of five affidavits in support of this appeal."
[18]
Accordingly, when considering the Registrar's decision, I shall keep in mind the fact that this court has before it several affidavits that were not before the Registrar. I shall now proceed to determine whether the Registrar erred in finding that Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" was confusing with Labatt's trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design", which was Labatt's first ground of opposition to Molson's application. I shall not make any finding concerning Labatt's second ground of opposition, namely that Molson was not the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3)(a) of the
Trade-marks Act
, because the Registrar never reached a conclusion on that ground. Therefore, if this appeal is allowed, that issue will be referred back to the Registrar for a determination of that ground of opposition. Finally, I shall determine whether the Registrar erred in determining that Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" was not distinctive, which was Labatt's third ground of opposition to Molson's application.
ii. Did The Registrar Err In Refusing To Register Molson's Trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design", On The Basis It Was Confusing With Labatt's Applied For Trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design"?
[19]
As noted supra, the Registrar refused to register Molson's applied for mark "Molson Club Ale & Design", on the basis that it was confusing with Labatt's applied for trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design". In my view, Molson's applied for mark "Molson Club Ale & Design" is simply an updated version of its earlier registered trademark "Club Ale & Design", which reflects the change in ownership of the brewery from Formosa to Molson. The earlier mark, "Club Ale & Design", incorporated the name Formosa, whereas the applied for mark replaces this with the name Molson. In addition, there are stylistic differences between the two marks.
[20]
In my view, Molson being precluded from registering an updated version of its registered trademark "Club Ale & Design", by Labatt's applied for mark, "Manitoba's Club & Design", is somewhat anomalous. The reason being that Molson opposed Labatt's application for "Manitoba's Club & Design", on the basis it was confusing with Molson's trademark "Club Ale & Design". Furthermore, Labatt's application never matured to registration and was abandoned nearly ten years ago. The Registrar was sympathetic to the plight of Molson, however he felt constrained by the wording of s. 16(3)(b) of the
Act
. This provision reads as follows:
"16(3) Any applicant who has filed an application in accordance with s. 30 for registration of a proposed trademark that is registrable is entitled, subject to ss. 38 and 40, to secure its registration in respect of the wares or services specified in the application,
unless at the date of filing of the application it was confusing with
. . . . .
(b)
a trademark in respect of which an application for registration had been previously filed in Canada by any other person;
or" (emphasis added)
[21]
Thus, pursuant to s. 16(3)(b), the date Molson filed its application (November 17, 1975) is the material date to determine its confusion with trademarks for which applications for registration have been filed. On November 17, 1975, Labatt's application for the trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design" was pending, as it had been filed on December 15, 1971 and was not abandoned until November 30, 1987. Accordingly, the Registrar made a determination as to the likelihood of confusion between the two trademarks, even though by the time he made his decision in January of 1995, Labatt's application had been long since abandoned.
[22]
Labatt's application for the mark had been opposed by Molson, on the basis it was confusing with Molson's registered trademark "Club Ale & Design". The validity of this ground of opposition was never determined, as Labatt withdrew its application. However, to illustrate the anomaly created by s. 16(3) above, I shall assume for a moment that Molson's opposition was successful, and that Labatt had been unable to register "Manitoba's Club & Design", due to confusion with Molson's mark. Even if this had been the outcome of Labatt's application, in my view the Registrar in this case would not have decided any differently, as he only had regard to the date of Molson's application, being November 17, 1975. Thus, Molson's updated trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" could conceivably have been precluded from registration due to confusion with an applied for mark, "Manitoba's Club & Design", which never matured to registration due to its confusion with Molson's previously registered trademark.
[23]
I have only discussed this scenario, which in fact never materialized, to illustrate the absurdity of a result which could be reached pursuant to s. 16(3) of the
Act
. Nevertheless, the Registrar was quite correct in stating that there is "nothing in the
Act
precluding the opponent from relying on its application".
[24]
However, in making a determination pursuant to s. 16(3)(b), as to the likelihood of confusion between two trademarks, the provisions of s. 6 of the
Act
must be taken into consideration. This section reads in part as follows:
"6(1) For the purposes of this Act, a trademark or trade name is confusing with another trademark or tradename if the use of the first mentioned trademark or trade name would cause confusion with the last mentioned trademark or trade name in the manner and circumstances described in this section.
. . . . .
"(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to
all the surrounding circumstances
including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them." (emphasis added)
It is well-established law that in determining whether trademarks are confusing, the court may take into consideration not only the five factors listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) above, but shall have regard to all surrounding circumstances (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) at p. 110, affd. (1993), 155 N.R. 159; 49 C.P.R.(3d) 217 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 205 (T.D.) at p. 210; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 200 (T.D.) at p. 203.).
[25]
Molson submitted that the Registrar erred in failing to take into consideration or give sufficient weight to three surrounding circumstances, in respect of confusion between Molson's applied for mark and Labatt's applied for mark. These three circumstances are the following: (1) Molson owns the trademark "Club"; (2) Labatt previously submitted, in respect of its application for "Manitoba's Club & Design", that said mark was not confusing with Molson's "Club Ale & Design" which submission is inconsistent with Labatt's present position; and (3) Labatt abandoned its application for the trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design".
[26]
Concerning Molson's ownership of the trademark "Club", I agree that this factor is relevant to these proceedings because the Registrar's finding of confusion between the trademarks was significantly influenced by the dominance of the word "Club" in both marks. In this regard the Registrar stated:
"As for s. 6(5)(e) of the
Act
, I consider there to be a fairly high degree of resemblance between the marks in all respects. Both marks are dominated by the word "Club" and a stylized representation of a clover leaf. The non-distinctive word 'Ale' in the applicant's mark does nothing to distinguish it from the opponent's registered mark. In fact, it would seem likely that both marks could be phonetically referred to as 'Club' thereby increasing the likelihood of confusion." (Registrar's Decision, January 31, 1995 at p. 4.)
[27]
In my view, the fact that Molson owns the trademark "Club" only adds to the irony of this decision. However, I am also of the view, that this fact does not make the two marks any less confusing. It is not a surrounding circumstance that is relevant to the issue of confusion. It makes no difference, in terms of assessing the confusion between these two trademarks, who owns the trademark "Club". Accordingly, I shall not take into consideration this circumstance when determining the issue of confusion.
[28]
Molson further submits that Labatt has taken inconsistent positions in respect of the confusion between Labatt's trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design" and Molson's two trademarks "Club Ale & Design" and "Molson Club Ale & Design". That is, Labatt previously took the position, when attempting to register "Manitoba's Club & Design", that it was
not
confusing with Molson's previously applied for "Club Ale & Design" mark. However, in these proceedings, Labatt has taken the position that "Manitoba's Club & Design"
is
confusing with "Molson Club Ale & Design", which Molson submits is even more similar to Labatt's mark then the "Club Ale & Design" mark was. In my view, this circumstance is not relevant in determining whether the two trademarks at issue are confusing. Regardless of the previous positions taken by Labatt, I must come to a determination as to confusion that is in accordance with the law and relevant jurisprudence.
[29]
The third surrounding circumstance put forth by Molson is the abandonment by Labatt of its application for registration of the trademark "Manitoba's Club & Design". The difficulty encountered by Molson with respect to this submission, is that Molson is asking the court to consider a surrounding circumstance that arose following the material date set out in s. 16(3), being the date of the application. In my view, the circumstance of Labatt having abandoned its trademark application, although it arose after the material date, is intrinsically connected to a circumstance which existed at the material date. In view of this inherent connection and the anomalous circumstances of this case, I find this is an appropriate case to take into consideration the fact that Labatt's application for registration of "Manitoba's Club & Design" was abandoned. Accordingly, having taken into consideration this surrounding circumstance, I need not proceed further to consider the factors listed in paragraphs (a) through (e), as I am satisfied that confusion between the trademarks is no longer an issue.
[30]
Based on the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" is not precluded from registration on the basis of s. 16(3)(b) of the
Act
, and accordingly this ground of opposition must fail.
iii. Did The Registrar Err In Determining That Molson's Trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" Was Not Distinctive?
[31]
The Registrar's decision with respect to the issue of distinctiveness was made "in passing" and did not involve a detailed analysis. In addition, the Registrar did not have the benefit of the affidavit of Barry Heisz, filed by Molson in respect of this appeal. Accordingly, I shall make my own determination in regards to distinctiveness, in view of this new evidence.
[32]
The third ground of opposition relied on by Labatt is found in s. 38(2)(d) of the
Act
, which reads as follows:
"38(2) A statement of opposition may be based on any of the following grounds:
. . . . .
(d) that the trademark is not distinctive."
[33]
The
Act
defines "distinctive" in s. 2 as follows:
"'distinctive', in relation to a trademark, means a trademark that actually distinguishes the wares or services in association with which it is used by its owner from the wares or services of others or is adapted so to distinguish them;"
[34]
Justice Dubé of this court, in
Molson Breweries, A  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 481 (T.D.), at p. 494 C.P.R. (hereinafter <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), aptly stated the criteria for distinctiveness as follows:
"The function and purpose of a trademark is to indicate the source of the goods. A trademark by definition must be and remain distinctive of a single source. Therefore, distinctiveness requires that:
(1) a mark and a product be associated;
(2) the owner uses this association between the mark and its product and is manufacturing and selling this product; and
(3) this association enables the owner to distinguish its product from that of others:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  material date for determining distinctiveness is the date of filing of the statement of opposition", which in the case at bar was October 15, 1985 (supra at 493 C.P.R.).
[36]
Therefore, to determine whether the applied for mark "Molson Club Ale & Design" is distinctive, I shall apply the above three criteria, set out by Justice Dubé supra, to the facts of this case. With respect to the first criteria, Molson has adduced evidence of use of the trademark on labels applied to bottles of beer, thus satisfying the requirement that the mark be associated with a product (affidavit of Barry Heisz, March 25, 1995). The second requirement is satisfied by Molson's evidence of use of the trademark on beer bottle labels and of manufacturing and selling the said beer (affidavit of Barry Heisz, March 25, 1995).
[37]
In respect of the third requirement, namely, that the association enables the owner to distinguish its product from that of others, Justice Dubé stated the following  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Brewing Co.
, supra, with respect to the onus on the applicant:
"In my view, the subject label clearly indicates the source of the product and the affidavit evidence provides sufficient proof of use by the predecessor in title of the subject trade mark in association with beer to meet the onus upon the applicant to show that the trademark distinguishes its wares from those of others." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 494 (C.P.R.).)
In the case at bar, the trademark has also been used as a label and it also indicates the source of the product, as it incorporates the word "Molson". Furthermore, the affidavit evidence provides proof of use by Molson and its predecessors of the trademark in association with beer. This evidence, contained in the affidavit of Barry Heisz (March 25, 1995), establishes continuous use of the "Molson Club Ale & Design" trademark since 1975, in association with brewed beverages; sales of brewed beverages in association with the trademark; and point-of-sale display advertising of the product in association with the trademark. Accordingly, I am satisfied that "Molson Club Ale & Design" also meets the third criteria of distinctiveness.
[38]
Therefore, I conclude that Labatt's third ground of opposition must fail, as Molson's trademark "Molson Club Ale & Design" is distinctive, as that term is defined in the
Act
.
IV.
Conclusion
[39]
For all of the foregoing reasons, I conclude the appeal must be allowed. Accordingly, the decision of the Registrar is set aside and the matter is referred back to the Registrar for rehearing and determination of the second ground of opposition, which was not considered by the Registrar. As noted earlier herein the second ground of opposition was to the effect that Molson was disentitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3)(a) of the
Act
because, as of Molson's filing date, the applied for trademark was confusing with a series of trademarks including the word "Club" and/or the representation of a playing card club symbol, previously used in Canada by Labatt.
[40]
Rule 1312 of the
Federal Court Rules
governs costs in respect of statutory appeals to this court. The rule states that no costs shall be payable by any party to an appeal unless the court, in its discretion, for special reasons, so orders. Both parties on this appeal requested an order for costs, however neither party submitted any special reasons for such an order. Accordingly, no order as to costs shall be granted with respect to this appeal.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/sms
[End of document]