 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Jamieson (an  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1986. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 A prison inmate was transferred to an institution with a higher security rating. He applied for an order of certiorari to quash the transfer. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, allowed the application on the ground that the inmate was denied procedural fairness by the failure to give him notice of and reasons for the transfer. 
 
 
 
 Administrative Law - Topic 2264 
 
 Natural justice - Duty of fairness - When required - The Federal Court, Trial Division, held that there is a duty of fairness in deciding to transfer prisoners within the prison system - The court held that a prisoner should be given notice of and the reasons for a transfer with an opportunity to respond. 
 
 
 
 Civil Rights - Topic 8547 
 
 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms - Interpretation - Principles of fundamental justice - The Federal Court, Trial Division, held that the principles of fundamental justice under s. 7 of the Charter require no more than the common law duty of fairness - See paragraph 4. 
 
 
 
 Prisons - Topic 1026 
 
 Administration - Powers re prisoners - Transfers - Duty of fairness - The Federal Court, Trial Division, held that there is a duty of fairness in deciding to transfer prisoners within the prison system - The court held that a prisoner should be given notice of and the reasons for a transfer with an opportunity to respond. 
 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), appld. [para. 4]. 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, sect. 7 [para. 4]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 John L. Hill, for the applicant; 
 
 W.J. Miller, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Correctional Law Project, Queen's University, Kingston, Ont., for the applicant; 
 
 Frank Iacobucci, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This case was heard on March 4, 1986, at Ottawa, Ontario, before Strayer, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on March 11, 1986: 
 
 
  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Strayer, J. 
 : This is an application for certiorari to quash a decision by which the applicant, an inmate, was transferred from Frontenac Institution to Collins Bay Institution, and mandamus requiring that he be transferred from Collins Bay Institution to a facility with a security rating similar to that of Frontenac Institution. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicant was placed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Institution on October 1, 1985. While his affidavit contains a number of allegations as to his treatment there, counsel for the respondents objected to much of this evidence on the grounds that it was not relevant to the issues. I agree, and am only taking into account such matters as relate to the circumstances of the taking of the decision to transfer him to Collins Bay. It appears that he had been made aware for some weeks that there was suspicion that he was somehow involved in using or dealing in illicit drugs. This he denied at every opportunity. On October 24, 1985 he had a meeting with Mr. Downing, the Warden of Frontenac, and with Mr. Noble, his Classification Officer. The Warden told him that he was suspected of using drugs. There was nothing to indicate that the basis of this suspicion was conveyed to him, nor that there was any mention that consideration was being given to his transfer. He offered to give a blood sample to prove that he was not using drugs. On October 29th, he was, without warning, removed to Collins Bay Institution. On that same day, he was advised in writing by Ms. J. Grant, the Assistant-Superintendent  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that he had been transferred to Collins Bay because "the Administration  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Institution have good reason to believe that you are involved in illegal drug activities in the institution". No grounds for this belief were stated. This communication also advised him that he had 48 hours in which to reply in writing to Ms. Grant in relation to this matter. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  On October 30th the applicant wrote a lengthy letter to Ms. Grant in which he denied any involvement with drugs  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Institution and stated his objections to being transferred. On November 1st he wrote letters to both Mr. Downing, the Warden of Frontenac Institution, and Mr. Noble, his Classification Officer  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , asking for the reasons for his transfer, denying any involvement with illegal drugs  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and stating his objections to the transfer. The only replies he has had to these communications are the following. On November 6th Mr. Noble replied saying that an administrative meeting held on October 29th had decided "that your behaviour at F.I. was viewed as a serious detriment to the good order to [sic] the institution ..." He said that he did not have authority to release Security Information Reports in which the relevant information was documented. The "Problem areas identified (in general)", upon which the decision was apparently based, were described as follows: 
 
 
 
 "(1) Your conduct and performance was [sic] regarded as belligerent and verbally abusive to certain staff members. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Concerns and suspicion of drug use." 
 
 
 
 It will be noted that problem (1) was not stated as a reason for the transfer given in Ms. J. Grant's memorandum of October 29th to Jamieson. It will also be noted that Mr. Noble's communication does not purport to indicate that Jamieson's case was reviewed in the light of his representations in his letters of October 30th or November 1st. It simply reports the reasons which had led to the decision being taken in the first place. There was then on November 12th a memorandum from J. Grant to Jamieson which stated as follows: 
 
 
 
 "The decision to transfer you to higher security from S2 has not been finalized. It will be made by the Regional Manager Offender Programs who will take into consideration both your letter of rebuttal written within 48 hours of the transfer and confidential information contained in a Security Information Report. 
 
 
 
 "Your complaint is rejected." 
 
 
 
 There is no evidence that Jamieson has received any written or oral communication since that time as to the final decision or the reasons therefor. He remains in Collins Bay. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The jurisprudence is clear that there is a requirement of fairness when decisions are taken to transfer prisoners within the prison system: see, for example,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  requirement of a formal hearing prior to a transfer decision: see Pilon, supra. It also seems clear that since the coming into force of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s. 7 thereof applies but the "principles of fundamental justice" do not require more than the common law duty of fairness: see, e.g., the Chester and Hay cases, supra. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  A memorandum distributed to the prison system by the Commissioner of Corrections, dated November 1, 1984, deals with "involuntary inmate transfers". It states the general requirement that where a prisoner is to be transferred contrary to his will, he is to be given at least 48 hours notice in writing of the intended action and the reasons for it and be allowed to submit any written objections within that time to the decision-maker. Further, the decision-maker is required to consider the institution's recommendation and the inmate's objections before reaching a decision. If the decision goes against the inmate, he is to be given written reasons in writing. One exception to this procedure is provided where the Director of the institution has reason to believe that the inmate's reaction to a proposed transfer would be a threat to good order, in which case he may be put in segregation while a decision is taken but otherwise the same procedures are to apply. Yet a further exception is provided in the following paragraph: 
 
 
 
 "Should an emergency lead to a decision to transfer an inmate quickly and without notice, the written reasons for his transfer shall be prepared, transferred with the inmate and served to him upon arrival at the receiving institution. The written reasons shall be accompanied by a written notice that the inmate may submit written objections to his transfer for consideration by the designated decision-maker. Any objections submitted by the inmate shall be routed to the designated decision-maker who shall cause a written response to be presented to the inmate within ten working days of the date of the objections." 
 
 
 
 In this case, the affidavit of the Warden of Frontenac, Mr. Downing, indicates that circumstances existed in which this procedure was invoked. While his affidavit is not very clear as to the existence of an "emergency" as required by the paragraph cited, he says that Jamieson was transferred to Collins Bay before being advised because there are no segregation facilities  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and it was thought that the mere possibility of transfer would have given rise to a security risk. Even giving the prison authorities the benefit of the doubt on this point, however, the procedure which they have used does not measure up to the requirements of the paragraph in the instructions from the Commissioner of Corrections. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  Such instructions in an informal memorandum such as this certainly do not have the force of law nor, apparently, do the Commissioner's directives themselves. In any event, they cannot be determinative of the requirements of fairness, since those requirements now flow from the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which overrides other laws. I am inclined to think that the procedures outlined in the Commissioner's memorandum would normally constitute procedural fairness. In my view the authorities did not comply with the letter or the spirit of the Commissioner's memorandum and in any event did not comply with legal requirements of fairness. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  There is no evidence to indicate that the applicant was adequately informed as to the reasons for his transfer to enable him to respond to them. The written communications certainly do not amount to such notice. The only one which can be taken into account for these purposes, the one which was sent to Jamieson on October 29th to enable him to state his objections, only indicated that the authorities had good reason to believe that he was involved in illegal drug activities. No specifics were provided. The memorandum from Mr. Noble of October 6th, which the Warden now says was written on his behalf as well in reply to a letter which Jamieson had written to him at the same time as writing to Noble, indicates two reasons for transfer: that Jamieson's conduct was "belligerent and verbally abusive" and "suspicion of drug use". This indicates that the memorandum from Grant of October 29th did not fully state the grounds for the transfer. Nor does the Noble communication indicate any specifics either. Further, there is no evidence that Jamieson's replies of October 29th and November 1st have ever been taken into account by the "decision-maker" nor that a decision has been taken after consideration thereof. None of this is in accord with the Commissioner's memorandum or with basic fairness. In the absence of some evidence as to why this could not be done, the inmate should have been given the specific reasons for the intended transfer, it should be clear that his response thereto has been considered by the relevant decision-maker before a final decision was taken concerning the transfer, and he should have been advised as to what that decision was. The decision to transfer him must therefore be quashed. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  Counsel for the respondents cited to me the observations of my colleague Addy, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  cases. He said there that: 
 
 
 
 "... except in clear and unequivocal cases of serious injustice coupled with mala fides or unfairness, judges, as a general rule, should avoid the temptation of using their ex officio wisdom in the solemn, dignified and calm atmosphere of the courtroom in substituting their own judgment for that of experienced prison administrators." 
 
 
 
 I fully agree with the spirit of this observation. One should not expect formal and meticulous procedures to be followed in the taking of what must be fairly routine administrative decisions concerning such transfers, but the court fails in its duty if it does not require some evidence as to basic requirements of fairness having been observed. In this case the only evidence put before me by the respondents is of a most perfunctory nature. As noted above, it does not directly and clearly demonstrate an emergency. The Warden in his affidavit does not testify as to the nature of his conversation with Jamieson on October 24th, although one might have thought that the reasons relevant to a transfer would have been discussed at that time. He does not indicate in any way that Jamieson's submissions of October 29th or November 1st were considered in relation to reconsideration of the transfer order. He is content to say that Mr. Noble was replying for him as well in his letter of November 6th, but Mr. Noble in that letter is only purporting to explain the initial decision for the transfer and not to make the final decision, which, Ms. J. Grant in her memorandum of November 12th indicates, was yet to be made. Nor does Mr. Downing indicate in any way as to whether a final decision has yet been made or that such has been communicated orally or in writing to Jamieson, even though the Commissioner's directive requires a written response to be presented to the inmate within ten working days of the date of his objection to a transfer. It may be that there were security considerations for not advising either Jamieson or the court of the specific grounds or information upon which it was found necessary to take a decision of transfer. But the Warden does not even go so far as to invoke the existence of such security reasons for the failure to give Jamieson better notice or to inform this court as to the necessity for what appears to be arbitrary action. All I have before me in this respect are unsworn comments in the memoranda of prison officials. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  In the circumstances it appears to me that the respondents are asking this court to defer to their wisdom without either demonstrating a basic compliance with the requirements of fairness or explaining why such compliance was not possible. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The decision taken to transfer the applicant from Frontenac Institution to Collins Bay Institution will therefore be quashed. In my view this court does not have authority to issue the mandamus order requiring his specific transfer as there is no corresponding duty on the respondents to place the inmate in any specific institution or a specific kind of institution. Nor in my view will the order for certiorari have the effect of requiring this inmate's return to the Frontenac Institution at once, as it appears to me to be open to the respondents to hold him at Collins Bay pending the taking of a decision, in accordance with the requirements of fairness, for his transfer to that institution or elsewhere. This is in recognition of the respondents' authority to place an inmate in a more secure institution temporarily while a decision is being taken as to a transfer. The effect of the certiorari order, in my view, is simply to require that a new decision be taken as to his transfer in accordance with the requirements of fairness. 
 
 
 
 ORDER 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  An order of certiorari is hereby issued, effective March 17, 1986, to quash the decision of the Commissioner of Corrections or his delegates transferring the applicant from Frontenac Institution to Collins Bay Institution on October 29, 1985 and pursuant to which he continues to be held at Collins Bay Institution. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  Costs are awarded to the applicant. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed in part. 
 
 
 
 Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/klf 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 



