[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application for a judicial review, pursuant to leave granted by Mr. Justice Rothstein, J., of a decision of the Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the Board"), dated January 12, 1993. The board determined that the applicant was not a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The basis for this was that the applicant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution.
[2]
The applicant seeks an order in the nature of certiorari quashing the decision of the board and an order in the nature of mandamus directing the board to reconsider the applicant's application for convention refugee status by a differently constituted panel.
[3]
The issues as set out in the applicant's memorandum of argument can, essentially, be stated as follows:
(1) The board based its decision on erroneous findings of fact made without regard and contrary to the material before it;
(2) The board based its decision on erroneous findings of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner; and
(3) The board failed to observe a principle of natural justice in that it did not afford the applicant an opportunity to rebut one of the conclusions (which was contrary to the evidence presented) it had made.
Facts:
[4]
The applicant is a citizen of the Peoples Republic of China. From 1972 until March 1992 the applicant worked at the Nanjing Automobile Factory. In April 1992 the applicant "escaped" from China by bribing an official of the "Section of Exit-Entry Administration of the Nanjing Municipal Public Security Bureau" in order to obtain an exit permission card.
[5]
The applicant states that she has a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of her political opinion and membership in a particular social group. The applicant has been, and would continue to be if returned to China, persecuted as a consequence of the activities of those with whom she has associated as well as her own political activities.
[6]
The applicant's husband was involved in the prodemocracy movement. This involvement came to the attention of the Chinese authorities only after the husband had gone to Canada to study in September 1990. The applicant's husband was labelled a "counter-revolutionary" and his "public employment" was terminated. As a consequence of this termination the applicant no longer received her husband's income. Further, the applicant and her daughter were forced to vacate their residence since it was provided as part of the husband's employment package. The applicant had also been investigated as a suspected "spouse-collaborator" in relation to her husband's "subversive" activities.
[7]
In May and June, 1991, the applicant took part in outlawed meetings and activities commemorating the June 4, 1989 massacre at Tiananmen Square. Her participation in these meetings was discovered because one of the organizers, who was arrested and put in jail, mentioned (in a forced confession) the applicant's involvement. In January 1992, the applicant was punished for these activities. (She was given a warning about doing things contrary to what the Chinese system required). Further, she was required to undergo "written self-criticisms" on a regular basis for a period of three weeks.
[8]
In July 1991, the applicant, as Vice-Chairman of the Trade Union Department of her work unit, refused to follow the orders of her superiors and enforce the chinese one-child-per-couple policy. She showed sympathy and did not require a colleague, who was seven months pregnant, to have an abortion. She indicated that it was dangerous and that she had concerns with respect to the mother's and the child's human rights. As a consequence of this action the applicant was subjected to "disciplinary criticism" and a warning. She also had her "benefits" removed for three months. It is not at all clear of what those "benefits" consisted, although there is reference to food and shelter in Exhibit C to her affidavit.
[9]
In November 1991, the applicant spoke out at a "Political Education" meeting in favour of the changes taking place in European communist countries. She also expressed her view that China should abandon communism. As a result of this speech the applicant was classified as a "counter-revolutionary". She was again disciplined by being subjected to forced "self criticisms".
[10]
On December 23, 1991, the applicant attended a secret meeting for the purpose of establishing "The Democratic Worker's Union of Nanjing Automobile Factory" which was to act in opposition to the official Trade Union Department. The Trade Union Department is controlled by the Communist Party Committee. Officials of the Public Security Bureau raided the meeting and arrested the applicant. She refused to go with the officials and was therefore pushed to the ground and dragged to a police van by her hair. She suffered cuts and bruises and hair loss as a result. The applicant was held for twenty-four hours without food or water before being released. The authorities continued to assault the applicant during her detention.
[11]
As punishment for her involvement in the Democratic Worker's Trade Union meetings the applicant was demoted to a position which required her to perform strenuous physical labour. No other woman was employed in this position because of the nature of the physical labour required. As a result of being forced to work in this new position the applicant suffered severe physical pain and became ill. Further, the applicant was given one year's notice that she was to be expelled from employment at the Nanjing factory. When she lost that job she would also lose her house and her ability to earn a living. The government assigns all jobs so it is unlikely that she would ever get a new one. Housing is usually only available as part of an employment package; therefore it is unlikely that she would have been able to get shelter. Information verifying this was contained in the material submitted to the board by the Refugee Hearing Officer (hereinafter "RHO"): USA State Department, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991 at 830-831 contained in the Tribunal Record at p. 87.
[12]
The applicant had been involved in other activities which are considered to be "counter-revolutionary" by the Chinese authorities. These activities include putting up anti-government posters and making anti-government speeches as well as putting up posters commemorating those who where killed by Chinese authorities on June 4, 1989, at Tiananmen Square. The applicant also publicly criticized the government at "commemoration meetings". As of the time of her escape the Chinese authorities were not aware of the applicant's involvement in these specific prodemocracy activities. There is a strong possibility that this information will become known to the authorities upon a "forced" confession of others who are currently imprisoned and who know of the applicant's involvement. When this happens the applicant will doubtlessly be condemned to suffer further punishment. Again, there was evidence in the material submitted to the board by the RHO that people involved in these types of pro-democratic activities are tortured and imprisoned. Some people have been imprisoned for up to thirteen years while others have been held indefinitely:
Amnesty International Report (1992)
at 88-89 contained in the Tribunal Record at 94-95.
[13]
Further, the applicant was not only present at the secret and illegal Democratic Worker's Union meetings but was actually one of two organizers of the Democratic Worker's Union. The applicant's co-organizer, Ms. Wang, has been imprisoned as a result of these organizational activities. The authorities did not, as of the time the applicant escaped from China, know of her involvement in these activities. In the event that the authorities become aware (if they have not already become aware) of the applicant's involvement in the organization of the Worker's Union she will definitely be condemned to suffer the same fate as Ms. Wang.
[14]
Since the applicant's escape from China the authorities have been looking for her. Her superiors at the factory have been severely reprimanded for not keeping better control over her.
[15]
Finally, the very fact that the applicant left China in the manner that she did would be sure to draw severe punishment if she were to return.
Decision Of The Board:
[16]
The board noted that the activities in which the applicant was involved and consequent penalties were not enough for the board to find a well-founded fear of persecution. The relevant portion of the decision reads as follows:
"The panel is of the opinion that the claimant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution.
"The sanctions applied to the claimant as a result of her activities are relatively light.
"For her opposition to the one-child policy, the claimant experienced disciplinary criticism and the withholding of benefits for a three month period. While this may be discriminatory, it cannot be considered to be persecutory.
"For her attendances at clandestine meetings, the claimant was transferred and given one year's notice that she would be terminated. Once again, this represents discrimination and not persecution. The loss (or future loss) of
a
job does not equate to the denial of or serious restriction on the right to earn a livelihood. There is no evidence before us to indicate that the claimant was prevented from seeking alternate employment.
"The foregoing is not determinative of the claim. Past experiences are relevant, but the definition is essentially prospective. The test to be applied is whether or not there is a reasonable chance that the claimant would be persecuted were she to be returned to China.
"The panel finds no such reasonable chance to exist in this case. Chinese authorities already know of the claimant's activities and she has already been 'punished'. The only activity not known is the putting up of posters. Given the relative light sanctions applied in regard to clearly more serious activities, the panel can find no reasonable chance of persecution if her postering becomes known.
"The claimants evidence about her friend, who remains in detention, is of minimal probative value. This friend was involved in the organization of meetings and may thus be treated more severely by the authorities. In any event, the claimant's attendance at those meetings is already known and she has already been punished therefor.
"Even if all of the claimant's experiences be considered on a cumulative basis, we cannot find there to be a well-founded fear of persecution." (p.3-4)
Applicant's Arguments:
[17]
First and foremost, the applicant argues that the board came to a conclusion without regard to the material before it when it noted that the information relating to the applicant's friend and co-organizer, Ms. Wang, was of little probative value. The board's reason for this was that Ms. Wang was involved in the actual organization of the Democratic Worker's Trade Union whereas the applicant had only attended meetings. Therefore, the board noted that Ms. Wang suffered a different and more severe punishment. Further, the board found that the authorities had already punished the applicant for attending these meetings and therefore there would be no further punishment relating to the Democratic Worker's Trade Union.
[18]
The applicant argues that the evidence relating to Mrs. Wang's imprisonment is extremely significant since the applicant was in exactly the same position as Ms. Wang. The applicant notes that there was ample evidence presented that she was a co-organizer of the Democratic Worker's Trade Union. The only reason she was not punished for being an organizer was that she escaped from China before the authorities could find out the extent of her involvement. When the authorities do find out (if they have not already) the applicant too would suffer the same fate, if she was still in China, as her friend, Ms. Wang.
[19]
The applicant argues that the board's error in making this conclusion, which was contrary to uncontradicted testimonial and documentary evidence, is sufficient to justify an order in the nature of certiorari as well as an order requiring the matter to be sent back to a differently constituted panel for rehearing.
[20]
Second, the applicant argues that the board committed an error when it concluded the applicant had not provided evidence that she could not obtain further employment. The applicant argues that she testified before the board that the government controls all housing and employment and that there was no evidence to contradict that testimony.
[21]
Third, the applicant argues that the board misconstrued evidence relating to the actual punishment she had received as a result of the authorities' raid on the Democratic Worker's Trade Union meeting. There was evidence that the applicant was detained, tortured and placed into hard labour at work as a result. The applicant argues that this finding was made in a perverse and capricious manner.
Respondent's Arguments:
[22]
On the face of it the Refugee Division erred in its implicit conclusion that the applicant did not organize the union meetings. However, the respondent contends that such a conclusion does not constitute a reviewable error of law because it was not relied upon by the Refugee Division in making its ultimate determination:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at pages 116 and 117.
[23]
Also, states the respondent, it is clear in the reasons for decision of the Refugee Division that it found that the applicant had already been "punished" for her participation in the union meetings and that her participation in meetings as someone who organized the union was already known to those who punished her. This is outlined in Exhibit B of Yue's affidavit which reads:
"The Shaft Housing Branch of the Nanjing Automobile Factory Document No. 27(92), S.H.B. of N.A.F.
Decision Concerning Disciplinary Punishment on Quiozhen Yue
All subordinate units of the factory:
Qiaozhen Yue, an office staff of the Trade Union Department of our factory, was found in last June involved in the secret meeting and activities in memory of the two year anniversary of the 'June 4th', and later in December of last year was again found involved in the counter-revolutionary activity of organizing 'The Democratic Trade Union of the Nanjing Automobile Factory' and was thus detained by the public security authority one day. According to Document No. 5(89) of Nanjing Automobile Factory, Qiaozhen Yue is given a punishment of being expelled from the factory (with one-year probation to observe) during which she should be removed from the Trade Union Department and assigned to another position.
Jan. 24, 1992
stamp of: The Shaft Housing Branch of The Nanjing Automobile Factory"
[24]
So, the board declared in their "crucial finding" that the applicant had already been punished for her union activities and they relied on that finding.
[25]
The respondent argues that even if the Refugee Division failed to mention the other aspects of the applicant's punishment, such failure does not constitute a reviewable error. It is submitted the Refugee Division reasonably concluded that evidence of past experience which might constitute persecution was not determinative of the claim, and even if the division had mentioned those forgotten aspects of the punishment, its ultimate decision would not have been changed.
[26]
The issue of not being able to get a job due to her political activities was not determinative of the applicant's claim, and the Refugee Division would still have found that the applicant is not a Convention Refugee because there was not reasonable chance that she might be persecuted in the future.
[27]
Not a Convention Refugee, said the Refugee Division, because she did not face a serious risk of persecution as she had already been "punished" by the authorities for her activities which punishment itself did not constitute persecution.
Analysis:
[28]
It would seem that the applicant's first argument is enough for this court to conclude that the board made a serious error which justifies granting the relief requested by the applicant. Therefore, the effect of the board's conclusions that the applicant had not provided any evidence that she could not get any other employment and/or shelter in China and the board's failure to mention the treatment she received upon being arrested in the raid does not need to be addressed.
[29]
Where a board makes a conclusion that is clearly contrary to all of the evidence before it and that conclusion has a significant bearing on the disposition, the error will justify setting aside the board's decision:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). It is clear and uncontradicted in the case at bar that the applicant was one of the organizers of the Democratic Worker's Trade Union. It is also clear that she had a well-founded fear that she too would suffer the same fate as her co-organizer, Ms. Wang, I she were returned to China. In the face of this evidence the board, nonetheless, concluded that the status of Ms. Wang was of little probative value since the applicant was not involved to the same extent as Ms Wang in that Ms. Wang was an actual organizer whereas the applicant merely attended meetings relating to the Democratic Worker's Trade Union. This conclusion was clearly contrary to all of the evidence and could not be supported by any evidence before the board. Because of this it can only be inferred that the board failed to take into account the evidence before it on this point: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , infra. The board failed to find the obvious fact that the applicant and Ms. Wang were similarly situated.
[30]
It has been held in several cases that the fate of those who are similarly situated to a refugee claimant is important in that it tends to establish the well-foundedness of a claimant's fear of persecution.
[31]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) the applicant had come from Pakistan to study in Canada. While the applicant was in Canada the government of Pakistan was overthrown in a military coup. The authorities were trying to find the applicant, i.e., he was the subject of a "martial law summons". Two of his close associates who were involved in similar political activities were also given summons and were actually arrested and detained for six and 12 months respectively. They were also tortured. The board rejected the applicant's claim, in part, because he played a relatively minor political role in Pakistan and had been absent for a long time. In response to this Hugessen, J.A., stated at 116:
"... the whole gravamen of the applicant's case is not that he fears being
lawfully
imprisoned and tortured but rather that he will, in fact, receive the same treatment as his two companions. It will be recalled that the latter had engaged in the same activities as the applicant and had received the same sort of summons ...
. . . . .
"Neither the applicant's minor role nor the length of his absence form Pakistan were relevant in light of the uncontradicted evidence which the board had accepted, namely, that the others who had played the same role had been persecuted and that political persecutions of former members of the P.P.P. were still current at the time of the appeal. In the circumstances, it appears to me that, if the board had not committed the errors which I have indicated, it could only have come to the conclusion that the applicant had satisfied the definition of Convention Refugee."
[32]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) the claimant was a citizen of China. The Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board determined that the applicant was not a Convention Refugee on the basis that he lacked credibility. The board found that the applicant's testimony was inconsistent with the documentary evidence before it. MacGuigan, J.A., for the court, allowed the appeal, set aside the decision of the board and returned the matter to be heard by a differently constituted board.
[33]
As to the findings of lack of credibility, which were based upon drawing inferences from the plausibility of the appellants testimony, MacGuigan, J.A., held:
"... to our mind the above conclusions of the board are generally disputable, and for the most part contradict or ignore the evidence in the record.
. . . . .
"The appellant feared persecution not only because of his mere participation in certain demonstrations for democracy, but also ... because some of his similarly situated friends were arrested and were not seen again, because authorities actually came for him ... continued to pursue him ..." (At 5-6) (my emphasis)
[34]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the issue was whether the board's conclusion that the applicant was of no greater risk than other people in Somali and therefore not a Convention Refugee was supportable on the evidence. One of the findings of the board was that there was no evidence that the applicant or his family members or members of his tribe were targets of "USC forces". Justice Reed indicated that there was evidence on the record that the applicant, his family members and those of his tribe were targets. Justice Reed stated:
"The finding that there was
no evidence
that the applicant, his family members or the members of his sub-clan were, as such, the targets or the USC forces, is hard to justify on the basis of the evidence which was before the board. That finding is also crucial to the board's decision that the applicant was not a Convention Refugee. I must conclude that the board's decision was made without regard to the material before it and that that decision must be set aside." (at 2-3)
[35]
Upon considering the above-noted cases it seems clear that the question of whether the applicant was in a similar position to Ms. Wang would have been crucial to establishing the finding of "well-founded fear of persecution" if she were returned to China. It was clear that the applicant was indeed similarly situated yet the board came to the conclusion that she was not. Because of this and the significance of establishing persecution of those similarly situated, the board's error puts its whole decision in doubt. It seems probable that if the board had found, as the evidence established, that the applicant was in the same position as Ms. Wang it may well have found her to be a Convention Refugee.
Conclusions
[36]
In conclusion, I find that the board made no mention that it doubted the applicant's credibility. Therefore it must be assumed that there was no issue as to the applicant's credibility:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 394-395 (F.C.A.). Further, the board did not question the truth of any of the evidence put before it.
[37]
The evidence establishes that persons who were engaged in similar pro-democratic activities were tortured and imprisoned for long periods of time. The evidence also establishes that the applicant's co-organizer in the Democratic Worker's Trade Union has been imprisoned as a consequence of those organizational activities. Most important, this uncontradicted evidence raises an inference that the applicant would be in serious danger of being imprisoned upon her return to China as a consequence of her involvement in pro-democratic activities and the organization of the Democratic Worker's Trade Union.
[38]
The decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board is set aside and this matter is referred back to a differently constituted panel of the Board for determination pursuant to my reasons herein.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]